GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

AAS

due to civil war, poverty and/or economic
instability.

Asian & Asian American
Studies

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

AAS 500: Intellectual History of East
Asia
This course examines the major intellectual
traditions of East Asia with an idea that
intellectual movements not only reflect but
also influence historical developments. It
is designed to help students enhance their
understanding of East Asian thoughts, history,
and culture. Topics will cover the intellectual
movements in China, Japan, and Korea from
ancient times to the early 20th century.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AAS 501: Proseminar: Topics &
Methods in Contemporary Asian and
Asian American Studies
This course introduces students to qualitative
and quantitative research methods
commonly used in social sciences and
humanities, including narrative research,
phenomenological research, ethnographic
research, case study research, correlational
research, and survey research. Students are
expected to identify a topic of interest of their
own choosing within Contemporary Asian
and Asian American Students and develop a
pilot research project. The instructor plays the
role of a facilitator by leading methodological
as well as thematic discussions on research
topics initiated by students. This course takes
the formats of lectures, workshops, student
presentations, peer critique, and one-on-one
instructor-student conferences.

AAS 534: English in Asia
Study of the expanding roles of English in
South Asia, East Asia, and Southeast Asia.
With more non-native speakers than native
speakers, and more in Asia than elsewhere,
English has acquired new identities. We
will study functions of English in colonial
and post-colonial times; how it competes
with, and complements local languages in
business, advertising, media, education,
research, administration, judiciary, creative
literature, call centers, and on the Internet; the
evolution of dynamic new Asian Englishes,
such as Indian English, and their social and
cultural contexts; controversies regarding
English medium education and its impact
on local languages, relevance of native
English standards, and implications for
theory, description, and method in diverse
disciplines, such as, business communication,
cultural studies, English, lexicography,
speech recognition, journalism, media studies,
sociolinguistics, teaching English as a second
language, and Asian Studies.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AAS 540: Inter-Asia Cultural Studies
This course is an examination of the critical
theory on Inter-Asia cultures and phenomena.
Emphasis is placed on the role of culture
within the writing, documentation, and
evidencing of history. Attention may be
focused on a particular era, group, institution,
type of object, or event.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AAS 505: The Pacific, Travel and
Empire
This cultural studies course examines the
cultures of travel (i.e. fiction, memoirs,
photography , and filmmaking) in narratives
by and about the Pacific, South and Southeast
Asia. We will student ¿empire¿ by analyzing
narratives about the former colonies of Spain,
France, Britain and the United States. As we
discuss the metaphors or tropes of empire,
we will also examine the concept of empire
as a historical and contemporary formation,
or what an empire meant in the 19th century
and what is means today in the early 21st
century. The course begins with the premise
that travel narratives and modern visual
culture illuminate the relationship between the
violence and romance of travel. The course
includes modern travel narratives (i.e. novels
by Asian Americans) that focus on the lives
of those who are forced to travel or migrate

AAS 545: Acquisition of Asian
Languages
This course will analyze the cognitive
processes involved in the acquisition of Asian
languages as second or foreign languages.
We will start with discussion of first language
acquisition and compare it with second
language acquisition (SLA). Methodologies
such as contrastive analysis and error analysis,
and concepts such as interlanguage, native and
non-native competence, bilingual competence,
acceptability, correctness, standard language
will be critically examined. We will also
consider the variables that affect SLA,
including age, context, exposure, attitude,
cognition, attention and motivation. Special
attention will be given to the applicability of
current research paradigms and findings to
the acquisition of languages such as Chinese,
Japanese, Korean, and Hindi, both in terms
of their structural characteristics and in their
socio-cultural context.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AAS 547: Directed Reading in
Contemporary Asian and Asian
American Studies
This course provides an opportunity for
graduate students in Contemporary Asian and
Asian American Studies to pursue readings
in an area of their interest as part of their
graduate program studies. Independent
readings in graduate topics in Contemporary
Asian and Asian American studies. May be
repeated. Prerequisites: Approval by Director
of Graduate Studies
1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
AAS 555: Heritage Languages of Asian
Americans
English has long been the dominant language
used in the United States, while the languages
of numerous indigenous and immigrant
communities have declined and many
have died. At the same time, the United
States¿ extensive global role, the rising
geopolitical rise of Asian powers, such as
China, India, Japan, South Korean, and others
has highlighted the need to foster greater
Asian language and cultural skills among
Americans. In that context, maintaining
the existing diversity of languages spoken
among American immigrant populations
becomes as important and effective as
teaching the languages to new populations.
There is an increasing recognition that the
advantages of such multilingualism are not
only cultural, but also cognitive, diplomatic,
security, commercial, social, and political
as well. Retaining knowledge of the home
language is found to promote the minority
individuals¿ psychological well-being,
facilitate communication and bonding across
generations, and ease the process of adjusting
to life away from the home country, while
promoting a pluralistic outlook and providing
globally valuable job skills. Still, the brunt
of the actual effort to foster multilingualism
has been left to individual families despite the
known fact that parental effort at maintenance
alone are not enough to prevent an eventual
shift to English. This new course is a critical
examination of the nature and extent of
available support (institutional, social, family,
and other) for maintaining this valuable
resource of Asian immigrants languages.
Students learn through through in-depth
readings, class lectures and discusssions, and
directed research in language communities of
their choice.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

1

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
AAS 560: Empire, Memory and
Narratives of Asian America
Asian American literary scholars have focused
on the tropes of immigration and settlement as
major paradigms for mapping the landscape
of Asian American writing. The late 1990s,
however, witnessed the emergence of novels ,
memoirs, narrative and experimental films
the departed from current notions of Asian
American literature and films. A distinct
cohort of writers and filmmakers, who
are first-generation immigrants, created
cultural forms that focus on the heimat or the
homeland, narrating history, the legacies of
war, violence, personal and national memory.
The seminar considers how these fictional
and non-fictional narratives engage with new
aesthetic and political questions regarding
Asian American writing, filmmaking and the
limits and the possibilities of memory in the
digital age.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AAS 565: Food, Labor and Asian
America
¿An authentic taste of Asia¿ is a marketing
phrase haunted by the violent histories of
Orientalism, Western expansion and wars in
Asia. In truth, the success and popularity of
some Asian food is more than the celebration
of the immigrant work ethic. Behind the
popularity are geopolitical and labor issues.
The consumption of beef and poultry in the
U.S., for example, is intimately connected
to the exploitation of immigrants from the
global south. Undocumented immigrants
and refugees from Southeast Asia, East
Africa and the Americas perform the dirty
task of slaughtering millions of animals:
chickens, turkeys, pigs, ducks, sheep, lamb,
calves. In 2009 alone, 33,300,000 cattle were
killed for their meat in the United States.
Immigrant laborers of American industrial
slaughterhouses carry out dirty and dangerous
work, killing and dismembering animals even
as the laborers themselves live in crowded,
unsanitary quarters. Similarly, the cooks of
America¿s kitchens are immigrants from Asia
and other parts of the world. This new MA
course focuses on the emerging field known
as ¿food studies,¿ in particular the politics and
histories of Asian food and its popularity in the
United States. If the old adage is ¿we are what
we eat,¿ what does it mean that Asian food in
the U.S. is intimately connected to the histories
of wars in Asia, undocumented labor, and the
exploitation of immigrant food workers?
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AAS 571: Islamic Thought in Asia
Islam is commonly considered a MiddleEastern religion, but most of the Middle

Spring 2021
East lies within the Asian continent, and the
vast majority of Muslims over the centuries
have been non-Arabic speakers, living across
south and central Asia into India, China, and
Indonesia. We will survey the importance of
Island as the todays¿ largest Asian religion
(numerically speaking) and look at some of
the distinctive features of its local variants.
We will pay special attention to the manner
in which teachings were presented in the
languages besides Arabic that became Islam¿s
vehicles, in particular Chines, which witnessed
a remarkable synthesis of the Islamic and
Confucian worldviews.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AAS 572: Topics in Asian Philosophy I
This course presents in-depth student of
specific topic in an Asian philosophical
tradition. Students are expected to demonstrate
knowledge through mastery of native terms
and concepts from that tradition. May be
repeated as the topics changes.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
AAS 573: Orientalism
Edward Said¿s Orientalism, written in 1978,
was a polemical attack on the discipline
of Orientalism and the representations of
the ¿orient¿ in western thought. Almost
thirty years later, the debate still rages: are
all western scholars writings¿ about Asia
complicit in imperialism? Is there such a
thing as objective scholarship, or are power
and knowledge so deeply intertwined that all
intellectual activity is inherently political?
Taking our start from Said¿s ideas, we will
look at authors who extended Said¿s critique
to the fields of South Asian and East Asian
Studies, and also examine some of Said¿s most
outspoken critics. In investigating these issues,
students will learn about some of the major
figures in the history of Asian students. We
will conclude the semester by exploring the
possibilities for ¿post-orientalist¿ approaches
to the study of Asian cultures and religions,
and by examining the pervasiveness of
orientalist themes in popular culture.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AAS 575: Multilingualism &
Communication in Asia
Survey of multilingualism as a cognitive
phenomenon and communication strategy with
special reference to traditionally multilingual
societies. Structural, sociolinguistic, cultural,
and cognitive models are evaluated for their
adequacy in representing multilingualism
in Western and especially non-Western
(Asian and African cultures. Topics include
concepts of multilingualism, typology of

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

multilingualism; functional distribution of
languages in education, media, social media,
and business; diglossia, code-switching
and code-mixing, psycholinguistic and
neurolinguistic models of multiple language
representation and processing in the brain;
synchronic and diachronic dimensions of
language contact and interaction in the
individual and society: accents, interference,
transfer on various linguistic levels;
borrowing, linguistic convergence, emergence
of pidgins, creoles, mixed languages, styles,
and non-native varieties; multilingualism
as a pragmatic and stylistic literary device
speech acts and multilingual creativity; sociopolitical dimensions of multilingualism:
multilingualism and identity; accommodation
and assimilation; language maintenance and
shift; language rivalry and conflict; spread
of languages of wider communication and
minority languages¿ anxiety about hegemony
and endangerment; cross-cultural case students
of pluralistic models of synergistic coexistence.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AAS 585: Translation Studies of Asian
Languages
Inquiry into issues in the translation of Asian
languages into/from English. This course
introduces the recent theories and concepts
of translation studies and applies them to the
analysis of a variety of Asian texts as source
texts or target texts. Students are expected to
gain insights into the lexical, grammatical,
cognitive, pragmatic, and socio-cultural
characteristics of Asian languages as well
as social and political issues that surround
translation of Asian texts. Texts to be analyzed
include, but are not limited to, literary works,
newspaper articles, advertisements, brochures,
and business letters. Advanced skills in one of
the Asian languages are required.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AAS 587: Supervised Research
in Contemporary Asian and Asian
American Studies
This course provides thesis credit for students
in the graduate program, Contemporary Asian
and Asian American Studies. Thesis credit.
Independent graduate research under the
supervision of a faculty member. May be
repeated to a limit of 6 credits. Prerequisites:
Approval of Director of Graduate Studies
1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 6 times FOR credit.

ACC
Accounting
2

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
ACC 529: Managerial Accounting and
Decision Making
This course covers cost accounting concepts
and theories and the implementation of an
accounting system as a source of information
for decision making, planning, control, and
the evaluation of organizational performance
by management. Other topics include costvolume-profit analysis, overhead rates,
budgeting and statement of cash flows.

Spring 2021
reorganization and dissolution of C and
S corporations. Topics associated with
partnerships and LLCs entities are also
reviewed. Students will be exposed to other
areas of our Federal tax system, including
U.S. multi-national, gift, estate, and fiduciary
income tax topics. State nexus and financial
accounting for income taxes concepts are also
introduced.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

ACC 562: Accounting Information
Systems
ACC 542: Accounting for the Small
A managerial approach to the concepts, issues
Business Entrepeneur
and techniques used to successfully manage
This course is designed to introduce the
and maintain an "Accounting Information
student to accounting and other financial
System." Topics will include business
concepts that the small business entrepreneur
processes such as the revenue and expenditure
needs to know in order to be successful. The
cycles; business transactions including
course will reinforce accounting concepts
already introduced in the Financial Accounting replenishment procedures and customer
course with an emphasis on the small business. loyalty programs; general ledger output and
Other business/financial concerns such as bank compliance requirements as well as interfaces
to OLAP environments.
reconciliations, payroll preparation, payroll
and sales tax compliance, maintenance of
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
installment debt, and utilization of sales and
ACC 580: Contemporary Issues in
purchase discounts will be reviewed. Since
Financial Accounting, Auditing and
most small business entrepreneurs need to
either do their own bookkeeping or at least be Regulation
intimately involved in the process this course
The focus of this course is on contemporary
requires the student to become familiar with
issues facing the accounting profession.
two different accounting software packages
It serves as an academic culmination that
(Quickbook and Peachtree).
draws upon other courses in the accounting
curriculum. In exploring contemporary
Prerequisite: G-1 Standing
issues, students will more deeply consider
Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
the theoretical underpinnings and practical
etc.)
application of accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States (GAAP);
ACC 543: Corporate Governance
auditing procedures and auditing standards
This course aims to enable students to
generally accepted in the United States
understand legal arrangement and social
(GAAS); federal taxation guidelines; and
economic theories that are necessary for
the profession's ethical, professional and
analyzing core issues of modern corporate
legal responsibilities. Pedagogy includes
governance. The role of accounting in
extensive use of newsworthy accounting
corporate governance is emphasized.
issues and the Financial Accounting Standards
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Codification, American Institute of Certified
ACC 544: Financial Statement Analysis Public Accountants Auditing Standards, and
the IRS Tax Code, Regulation, and Guidelines.
Financial statement analysis is central to
Course is team taught by three accounting
fundamental analysis of business. This course
instructors.
is about the analysis of financial statements
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
for making investment decisions. It integrates
key elements from accounting, finance, and
ACC 590: Advanced Auditing and
business strategy and applies them to financial
Assurance
decision-making. The course will be taught
using a combination of lectures, case analyses, This course builds on the foundation from
an undergraduate Auditing and Assurance
class discussions, and student presentations.
course, using case studies to motivate and
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
develop a thorough understanding of how audit
standards (GAAS), processes, and techniques
ACC 545: Entity Taxation
facilitate the auditor's role of validating that
Introduces fundamental income taxation
financial statements are presented fairly
concepts for business entities. Coverage
and in accordance with Generally Accepted
includes the formation, operation,
Accounting Principles (GAAP). Students
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

will learn through case studies, classroom
discussions, and projects. The course will also
cover contemporary issues in auditing.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ACC 591: Internal Auditing
This course is designed to introduce the
student to the goal of internal auditor, i.e.,
to understand, audit and report on an entity's
financial, compliance and operational control
systems. The course will discuss how the
internal auditor accomplishes this goal through
professional standards and the best industry
practices. This course will present information
that will enable the student to understand how
the internal audit process improves ethical
behavior and operational efficiencies within
the business environment. These sessions
include discussions about the history of the
internal audit function. Other topics discussed
will be application in the banking industry, the
Enron fraud and the resulting Sarbanes-Oxley
legislation and application to local government
environments. Finally, there will be discussion
about the audit committee and how it relates to
the internal audit.
Prerequisite: MBA 590
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ACC 594: Governmental and Not for
Profit Accounting and Reporting
This course is designed to introduce the
student to generally accepted accounting
practices (GAAP) for both governmental and
not-for-profit entities. The different accounting
rules for each type of entity will be explored
and compared to typical corporate accounting
practices. The course will examine standards
and issued by the two rule making bodies, i.e.
the Financial Accounting Standards Board
(FASB) and the Governmental Accounting
Standards Board (GASB) and how they affect
the accounting and financial reporting for
the two types of entities. These sessions will
include explanation of typical accounting
transactions and the resulting financial
statements. There will also be discussions
about current financial events affecting both
environments.
Prerequisite: MBA 562, MBA 590, MBA 591
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ACC 596: Financial Accounting Theory
This course explores the historical
development and refinement of the conceptual
framework of accounting theory as it relates
to financial reporting. The implications of
the convergence of International Accounting
Standards, and Generally Accepted
Accounting Principles (GAAP) in a global
environment are discussed. Current accounting
3

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
practices are analyzed and evaluated in the
context of the conceptual framework of
GAAP along with the discussion of research
methodologies.
Offered
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ACC 597: Advanced Accounting
This course provides the students with an
in-depth, up-to-date coverage of accounting
for consolidations, governmental, not-forprofit entities, and other key advanced topics.
The course links theory and practice with
constant emphasis on the logic of procedures.
Prerequisite: MBA 594, MBA 596
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ACC 598: Forensic Accounting
The aim of this course is to explore and master
the professional skills necessary to detect,
investigate and prevent fraud. Students will
learn how and why fraudulent activities are
committed, and how allegations of fraud
should be investigated and resolved. The use
of technology to proactively detect fraud will
be discussed. The following areas such as
financial investigations, financial statement
fraud, tax fraud, business valuation, resolution
and litigation services will be covered.
Prerequisites: MBA 585, MBA 590, MBA 591
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

AFH
Africana Studies/Humanities
AFH 520: The Caribbean and the
Literary Imagination
An examination of the literary representation
of the Caribbean through an extensive study of
selected fictional and theoretical writings. This
seminar will include an examination of the
representations of the Caribbean by African
American as well as Caribbean writers.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AFH 524: Contemporary African
Diasporic Literature and Film
Contemporary African American Diasporic
Literature and Film offers a comparative
analysis of twentieth and twenty-first century
African Diasporic writers and filmmakers
and their explorations of race, class, and
gender. To establish the shifting nature of
African Diasporic intellectual thought, we
shall consider how each successive generation
of writers and filmmakers builds upon
discussions of racial identity, black sexuality,
and social mobility. To demonstrate how
discussions of race have evolved over time

Spring 2021
texts will be read in conjunction with each
other. So for example, Fanon's seminal test
Black Skin White Masks, a text that seeks
to explain the racialization of society, the
double consciousness of black people, and the
superiority complex of white people will be
read against Paul Gilroy's Against Race, a text
arguing for the deconstruction and recognition
of race as a cultural construct. Other topics
for discussion focus on how "newer" writers
delve into questions of sexuality from a fresh
perspective. Comparing Morrison's Sula with
Cheryl West's play Before it Hits Home, for
example, demonstrates that writers are now
exploring questions of sexuality in more
provocative ways. West's uncovering of the
"downlow" life-style lived by Black men, and
the health concerns related and the dangers
of sexually transmitted diseases such as HIV/
AIDS. Permission from advisor required.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AFH 528: Contemporary Black
Literature and Cultural Criticism
This course introduces students to some of
the major contemporary literary and cultural
theorists from the twentieth and twentyfirst centuries (Fanon, Baker, Christian,
Gilroy, Mercer, Morrison, Gates, Patterson,
CLR James, etc). Earlier scholars from
the nineteenth century such as Anna Julia
Cooper or Du Bois will also be referenced.
Through an examination of major literary
and cultural movements such as Negritude,
the Caribbean Artists Movement, The Black
Arts Movement, and the Post- Black Artists
Movement, students will gain insight into how
black scholars both critique and contribute
to the artistic, political, and social discourse
of the day. An application of Postcolonial,
Feminist/Womanist, and Cultural Criticism
will aid the students in their reading of the
critical materials.
Offered
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
AFH 564: Seminar in Francophone
Literature
Close examination of the literature written in
French of the Francophone world outside of
France, with special emphasis on the literature
of the Caribbean and Africa. This course will
pose and explore questions such as: What
is Francophone literature and what are the
implications of a literature considered as
"Francophone"? What are the functions of
writing in French in a "postcolonial" context?
Permission of advisor required.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AFH 585: Independent Studies

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Specialized in-depth exploration of topics
related to Africana Studies core themes
based on a contractual relationship between
individual student and faculty. Student must
gain permission of selected faculty to enroll in
their section of this course. The course can be
taken only twice in fulfillment of requirements
for the M.A.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AFH 599: Thesis
This course is intended to prepare students in
developing a sustained and mature (nuanced)
argument for their M.A. thesis. The class is for
credit with flexible attendance requirements.
The student must have an AFS faculty sponsor
(thesis director) who will be responsible for
assigning a course grade. The class is available
beginning in the second term of a student's
enrollment in the M.A. program and in the
summer upon approval of the Director of
Graduate Studies.
6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

AFS
Africana Studies/Social and
Behavioral Sciences
AFS 500: Foundations in Africana
Studies, I
Core course required of all students pursuing
a master's degree in Africana Studies. The
two-semester foundations sequence will
introduce students to the theoretical issues
and historiography of the Africana Diaspora.
The parameters of African Diaspora studies
and will cover the historical, literary, sociopolitical, cultural, and economic themes of
the black experience. The course will provide
critical examination of the global experience
and promote an understanding of the Black
Diaspora. Students will read the works of
scholars who shaped the broad intellectual
world. The required readings will emphasize
the canons of Diaspora literature, including
works by and about W.E.B. Du Bois, George
Padmore, C.L.R. James, Marcus Garvey, and
others.
Permission of advisor required.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AFS 501: Foundations in Africana
Studies, II
Core course required of all students pursuing
a Master's degree in Africana Studies. The
two-semester foundations courses will
introduce students to the theoretical issues
and historiography of the Africana Diaspora.
The parameters of Africana Diaspora studies
will cover the historical, literary, socio4

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

political, cultural, and economic themes of
the black experience. The course will provide
critical examination of the global experience
and promote an understanding of the Black
Diaspora focusing on scholarly works by Paul
Gilroy, Chinua Achebe, Henry Louis Gates,
Angela Davis, Walter Rodney, and others.

This is a selective introduction to African
music, and the music of the African Diaspora.
We will read from major scholars in the
field of African music studies such as Simha
Arom, Christopher Waterman, Gerhard Kubik,
Michele Kisliuk, Ruth Stone, Kofi Agawu, and
others. Students will get a broad overview of
the music of the major regional subdivisions
Permission of advisor required.
of Africa (for instance North Africa, Central
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
Africa, South Africa, etc.), as well as a
etc.)
historical perspective on the musicological
issues that have been central to Africanist
AFS 502: Research Methods in
musicology and ethno musicology. There will
Africana Studies
be regular reading, listening, and short writing
This course introduces students to basic
concepts of research methodology, specifically assignments, occasional quizzes, a book
review, and a final research project of 16-18
as they pertain to studies of the African
diaspora. Students will be exposed to a variety pp. For the book review, students will write
about a monograph on African Music such
of critical approaches across such disciplines
as John Miller Chernoff's African Rhythm
as history, literature, political science, and
and African Sensibility or Paul Berliner's The
sociology in the context of Africana studies.
Soul of Mbira. Students will present their
Students will examine the ways in which
research to class towards the end of the term.
theoretical, ideological, and philosophical
Permission from course instructor required.
assumptions about race, class, and gender
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
shape the kinds of research questions we
ask and the types of instruments we use to
AFS 530: Slavery and the Atlantic
investigate and evaluate the experiences and
World
contributions of people from the African
diaspora.
This course will examine the experiences of
people of African descent as participants in
Permission of advisor required.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) a coerced migration that created the African
Diaspora. The transatlantic slave trade led to
an enduring image of black men and women
AFS 504: Racialized Oppressions and
as transported commodities. Therefore, it has
the Idea of Humanity
When one reads accounts of slavery, genocide, had the greatest impact on the construction
of the African Diaspora giving rise to new
the systematic denial of rights to a group
communities of people across the globe.
because of a racial identity, the question
always arises whether the oppressors view the
racialized other as fully human? This course
will explore this question and what it means to
view an individual or group as "fully human."
How have philosophical understandings of the
moral importance and the moral meaning of
"humanity" served to exacerbate, moderate
or fight against racial oppression? How does
racial and gender oppression compare in this
respect? Is there a comparison to be made
between racial oppression and the treatment
accorded to disabled people with respect to the
understanding of what it is to be human? Does
shifting the ground from a biologically-based
concept such as "humanity" to a philosophical
concept of "personhood" serve to justify or
serve as a tool against these identity-based
oppressions? Does shifting the ground justify
the analogy of racism with the abuse of
animals, as in the idea of "speciesism"? We
will explore as many of these questions as
interest dictates and time permits. Permission
from advisor required.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AFS 507: African Music

Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AFS 533: Race, Gender, and
Globalization
This seminar explores current issues and
debates relating to the racialized and gendered
effects of globalization. Topics include an
overview of the sociology of globalization
and theories of globalism/the global system,
transnational classes and a transnational state,
global culture and ideology, transnational
migrations and the new global labor market,
globalization and race/ethnicity, women
and globalization, local-global linkages, and
resistance to globalization.
Offered
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
AFS 536: Africa and Globalization
This seminar will discuss the interconnection
between this enduring crisis of the modern
African state and the impact of globalization,
especially after thecallpase of communism
in Eastern Europe. We will critically explore
the implications of these complex regional

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

and global political and economic forces
for emerging African social formation, the
viability of African states and societies, new
migration patterns, transnationalism, and
diasporic connections especially since the
decolonization process in the 1950's.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
AFS 540: The Black Power Movement
This course examines the Black Power
Movement. Stokely Carmichael's call for
"Black Power!" broke through the commotion
of everyday politics during 1966's Meredith
March Against Fear. Soon after, and for
the next decade, Black Power galvanized
African American politics, engendering radical
movements for social, political, and cultural
transformation that impacted blacks in the
United States and beyond. An emerging
historiography traces the roots of Black Power
in the postwar black freedom movement,
finding cultural and political touchstones
for future Black Power activism among
civil rights renegade, trade unionists, and
black nationalists. We will examine works
produced during the Black Power era and
new scholarship to analyze the Black Power
Movement's legacy in the politics and culture
of African Americans. Permission of advisor
is required. This course is offered as both HIS
540 and AFS 540.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AFS 541: Music and Race: Black Music
(Cross Cultural Study of Music)
This seminar will examine how certain widely
held conceptualizations about race (and in
some instances ethnicity) are articulated,
reinforced, or challenged in music making
and consumption, on the one hand, and in
scholarship about music on the other. Writings
on race and music have tended to be about
"black" culture(s). In this course we will
critique this focus and the construct of black
music in great detail. The course requires
extensive readings on these topics; listening
to musical examples (in-depth knowledge of
music theory is not necessary); vigorous class
discussion and written reaction papers; a final
research paper and class presentation. Students
may choose to explore other aspects of music
and race besides black music in their final
papers (for example, how Orientalism has been
constituted in music and musical criticism and
scholarship). Permission of advisor required.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AFS 542: Caribbean Transnational
Identity in the US
This course seeks to examine the strategies
some immigrants from the Caribbean utilize to
5

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
live their lives simultaneously in the US and
the country of origin. To do so, it sheds light
on the ways in which the US construction of
race and ethnicity influences the immigrants'
search for an identity in the United States.
Prerequisite: Enrollment in the Graduate
Certificate Program
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AFS 550: Women of Color in The
Modern World: Shifting Identities and
Feminist Visions
This course explores the various ways in
which gender, race, and class, along with
other aspects of identity, shape the lives and
experiences of women of color in the United
States and globally. It presents the ongoing
debates concerning the interconnections
of gender, race, and shifting identities. It
will examine the relationships between the
construction of personal identities, identity
statuses, cultural and ideological meaning
systems, and the search for alternative images.
Permission from advisor required.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AFS 555: Sociology of Gender and
Development
The 1960's marked a transition in global
economic relations from one characterized
by colonial extraction and exploitation,
to sustainable development emphasizing
economic growth and the alleviation of
poverty. It was quickly discovered, however,
that the effects of development were beneficial
for some but devastating for others, especially
poor women. The discovery led many scholars
and practitioners, especially those who
embrace feminist ideologies, to demand that
development agencies and policies be sensitive
to gender issues. This seminar will focus
on gender and development, in theory and
practice, in the global South. It will promote
students'
understanding of the central role that gender
plays in the success and assessment of
development strategies.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AFS 560: Sexualities: African and
Caribbean Perspectives
This seminar is designed to introduce students
to the complexities of human sexuality
from a perspective that places subaltern
individuals at the center of the analysis. It
locates these individuals, and their sexual
practices, in the Tropics (particularly in Africa
and the Caribbean) first in those man-made
communities where sexuality was one of
the (unspoken) exigencies of the slave and
colonial economies, and later in the modern

Spring 2021
era where these economies have given way to
neo-colonies.
Offered
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
AFS 570: The Black Radical Tradition
This course examines the black radical
tradition from slavery to the present, paying
particular attention of twentieth-century social
movements and the intersection between trade
unionism, black nationalism, internationalism,
and Marxism. Black radicalism has a long
history in the United States and beyond. At
its core, this tradition has housed diverse,
at times conflicting, ideological strains,
personalities, and organizations ranging from
black feminists, Marxists, socialists, liberals,
trade unionists, artists, and intellectuals. In
the process this tradition has run afoul of
more mainstream expressions of Black protest
(although in certain eras, such as during the
Black Power Movement, it has represented
the mainstream), and black radicals are often
marginalized as wild-eye dreamers, naive to
the ways of the world.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AFS 585: Independent Studies
Specialized in-depth exploration of topics
related to Africana Studies core themes
based on a contractual relationship between
individual student and faculty. Student must
gain permission of selected faculty to enroll in
their section of this course. The course can be
taken only twice in fulfillment of requirements
for the M.A.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
AFS 599: Thesis
This course is intended to prepare students in
developing a sustained and mature (nuanced)
argument for their M.A. thesis. The class is for
credit with flexible attendance requirements.
The student must have an AFS faculty sponsor
(thesis director) who will be responsible for
assigning a course grade. The class is available
beginning in the second term of a student's
enrollment in the M.A. program and in the
summer upon approval of the Director of
Graduate Studies. Fall and Spring
3-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
AFS 616: Twentieth Century African
Political History
This seminar is an extensive exploration of
African political history in the twentiethcentury. It examines the major themes that
have shaped the formation and the decline of

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

the modern African state since the imposition
of colonial rule in the late nineteenth century.
Drawing from monographs and journal articles
on twentieth century African social and
political history, and the recent scholarship on
state/society relations, the seminar will explore
the interactions between state institutions
and structures of society in colonial and
post-colonial Africa. The seminar is broadly
structured around key themes which are
presented in chronological order. These themes
are divided into three major sections. The first
section which deals with the colonial period
will examine the following themes: partition
and conquest; African resistance to early
colonialism; the historical processes of state
formation in Africa; the colonial economy;
and the interaction between the world religion
(Christianity and Islam) and colonial rule.
The second section on the postcolonial era
examines the following themes: the historical
processes of state formation in Africa;
communal identities and social change since
decolonization; the patriarchal society and
the crisis of the state; and the new debates on
democratization and civil society in the postCold War era. The final section examines the
international politics of African states from
both theoretically and historical perspectives.
The relevant themes here include the impact
of the major powers on African subregions
in the Cold War and post-containment eras;
the impact of multilateral agencies on African
political, economic and social developments;
regional organizations and African states.
The structure of the course is intended to
be coherent but flexible, so that we can
identify some basic trends in the reading
assignments and construct consistent themes
on the interplay of political transformation in
the twentieth century. Permission of advisor is
required.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

AMS
Applied Mathematics and
Statistics
AMS 500: Responsible Conduct of
Research and Scholarship (RCRS)
This course is designed to introduce students
to the major issues in the ethics of science and
research. Using a combination of readingswritten and web-based-videos, and case
discussion, students will investigate the moral
values intrinsic to science and the professional
and social values with which scientists
must comply. Each class will begin with an
introductory lecture or video followed by

6

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
discipline-based, small group discussions with
the participation of an AMS faculty member.

Spring 2021
Review of matrix operations. Elementary
matrices and reduction of general matrices by
elementary operations, canonical forms, and
inverses. Applications to physical problems.
Offered as AMS 505 or HPH 695.

and to problems in public finance. Whenever
practical, examples will use real market data.
Numerical exercises and projects in a highlevel programming environment will also be
assigned.

AMS 501: Differential Equations and
Boundary Value Problems I
Examples of initial and boundary value
problems in which differential equations
arise. Existence and uniqueness of solutions,
systems of linear differential equations, and
the fundamental solution matrix. Power
series solutions. Sturm-Liouville theory and
eigenfunction expansion. Green's functions.
Spring

Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

AMS 504: Foundations of Applied
Mathematics
An introductory course for the purpose of
developing certain concepts and techniques
that are fundamental in modern approaches
to the solution of applied problems. An
appropriate selection of topics is based on
the concepts of metric spaces, compactness,
sequences and convergence, continuity,
differentiation and integration, function
sequences, contraction mapping theorem.
Strong emphasis on proofs.

practical examples will use real market data.
Numerical exercises and projects in a highlevel programming environment will also be
assigned.

S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

AMS 513: Financial Derivatives and
Stochastic Calculus
Further development of derivative pricing
theory including the use of equivalent
martingale measures, the Girsanov Theorem,
the Radon-Nikodym Derivative, and a
deeper, more general understanding of the
Arbitrage Theorem. Numerical approaches
to solving stochastic PDE's will be further
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
developed. Applications involving interest
rate sensitive securities and more complex
AMS 502: Differential Equations and
AMS 510: Analytical Methods for
options will be introduced. Whenever
Boundary Value Problems II
Applied Mathematics and Statistics
Analytic solution techniques for, and
Review of techniques of multivariate calculus, practical examples will use real market data.
properties of solutions of, partial differential
convergence and limits, matrix analysis, vector Numerical exercises and projects in a highlevel programming environment will also be
equations, with concentration on second order space basics, and Lagrange multipliers.
assigned. Prerequisite: AMS 511. 3 Credits
PDEs. Techniques covered include: method
Prerequisite: A course in linear algebra and in
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
of characteristics, separation of variables,
multivariate calculus
eigenfunction expansions, spherical means.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 514: Computational Finance
Green's functions and fundamental solutions,
and Fourier transforms. Solution properties
AMS 511: Foundations of Quantitative Review of foundations: stochastic calculus,
include: energy conservation, dispersion,
martingales, pricing, and arbitrage. Basic
Finance
dissipation, existence and uniqueness,
principles of Monte Carlo and the efficiency
Introduction to capital markets, securities
maximum and mean value principles.
pricing and modern portfolio theory, including and effectiveness of simulation estimators.
Generation of pseudo- and quasi-random
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
the organization and operation of securities
numbers with sampling methods and
market, the Efficient Market Hypothesis and
distributions. Variance reduction techniques
AMS 503: Applications of Complex
its implications, the Capital Asset Pricing
such as control variates, antithetic variates,
Analysis
Model, the Arbitrage Pricing Theory and
stratified and Latin hypercube sampling,
A study of those concepts and techniques in
more general factor models. Common stocks
and importance sampling. Discretization
complex function theory that are of interest for and their valuation, statistical analysis, and
methods including first and second order
their applications. Pertinent material is selected portfolio selection in a single-period, meanmethods, trees, jumps, and barrier crossings.
from the following topics: harmonic functions, variance context will be explored along
Applications in pricing American options,
calculus of residues, conformal mapping, and
with its solution as a quadratic program.
interest rate sensitive derivatives, mortgagethe argument principle. Application is made to Fixed income securities and their valuation,
backed securities and risk management.
problems in heat conduction, potential theory, statistical analysis, and portfolio selection.
Whenever practical examples will use real
fluid dynamics, and feedback systems.
Discussion of the development and use of
market data. Extensive numerical exercises
financial
derivatives.
Introduction
to
risk
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
and projects in a general programming
neutral
pricing,
stochastic
calculus
and
etc.)
environment will also be assigned.
the Black-Scholes Formula. Whenever

Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 505: Applied Linear Algebra

AMS 507: Introduction to Probability
The topics include sample spaces, axioms
of probability, conditional probability and
independence, discrete and continuos random
variables, jointly distributed random variables,
characteristics of random variables, law of
large numbers and central limit theorem,
Markov chains.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

AMS 515: Case Studies in
Computational Finance
Actual applications of Quantitative Finance to
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
problems of risk assessment, product design,
AMS 512: Capital Markets and Portfolio portfolio management and securities pricing
will be covered. Particular attention will be
Theory
paid to data collection and analysis, the design
Development of capital markets and
and implementation of software, and, most
portfolio theory in both continuous time
importantly, to differences the occur between
and multi-period settings. Utility theory
"theory and practice" in model application,
and its application to the determination of
optimal consumption and investment policies. and to the development of practical strategies
for handling cases in which "model failure"
Asymptotic growth under conditions of
makes the naive use of quantitative techniques
uncertainty. Applications to problems in
dangerous. Extensive use of guest lecturers
strategic asset allocation over finite horizons
drawn from the industry will be made.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

7

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

The course explores in depth the fundamentals
of the Bayesian methodology and the use
AMS 516: Statistical Methods in
of the Bayesian theory in portfolio and risk
Finance
management. It focuses on, among other
topics, incorporating the prior views of
The course introduces statistical methods in
quantitative finance. Financial applications and analysts and investors into the asset allocation
process, estimating and predicting volatility,
statistical methodologies are intertwined in
improving risk forecasts, and combining the
all lectures. The course will cover regression
conclusions of different models. Numerical
analysis and applications to the Capital
exercises and projects in a high-level
Asset Pricing Model and multifactor pricing
models, principal components and multivariate programming environment will be assigned.
analysis, statistical methods for financial time 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
series; value at risk, smoothing techniques and
estimation of yield curves, and estimation and AMS 523: Mathematics of High
modeling volatilities.
Frequency Finance
Elements of real and complex linear spaces.
Prerequisite: AMS 586 or permission of the
Fourier series and transforms, the Laplance
instructor
transform and z-transform. Elements of
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
complex analysis including Cauchy theory,
etc.)
residue calculus, conformal mapping and
AMS 517: Quantitative Risk
Mobius transformations. Introduction to
Management
convex sets and analysis in finite dimensions,
the Legendre transform and duality. Examples
Quantitative Methods for risk management
are given in terms of applications to high
problems including market risk, credit
frequency finance.
risk, operational risk and Basel II accord.
Multivariable models; extreme value theory;
Offered
structure and reduced-form models of default; Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
and copula-based models.
AMS 526: Numerical Analysis I
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Direct and indirect methods for solving
AMS 518: Advanced Stochastic
simultaneous linear equations and matrix
Models, Risk Assessment, and
inversion, conditioning, and round-off errors.
Portfolio Optimization
Computation of eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
Corequisite: AMS 510 and AMS 595
The course provides a thorough treatment
of advanced risk measurement and portfolio
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
optimization, extending the traditional
approaches to these topics by combining
AMS 527: Numerical Analysis II
distributional models with risk or performance Numerical methods based upon functional
measures into one framework. It focuses on,
approximation: polynomial interpolation and
among others, the fundamentals of probability approximation; and numerical differentiation
metrics and optimization, new approaches
and integration. Solution methods for ordinary
to portfolio optimization, and a variety of
differential equations. AMS 527 may be taken
essential risk measures. Numerical exercises
whether or not the student has completed AMS
and projects in a high-level programming
526.
environment will be assigned.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
etc.)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

AMS 519: Internship in Quantitative
Finance
Supervised internship in financial institution.
Students will typically work at a trading
desk, in an asset management group, or in
a risk management group. Students will be
supervised by a faculty member and a manager
at their internship site. Written and oral reports
will be made to both supervisors.
3-6 credits,
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
AMS 522: Bayesian Methods in
Finance

AMS 528: Numerical Analysis III
An introduction to scientific computation,
this course considers the basic numerical
techniques designed to solve problems of
physical and engineering interest. Finite
difference methods are covered for the three
major classes of partial differential equations:
parabolic, elliptic, and hyperbolic. Practical
implementation will be discussed. The student
is also introduced to the important packages
of scientific software algorithms. AMS 528
may be taken whether or not the student has
completed AMS 526 or AMS 527.

Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
AMS 530: Principles in Parallel
Computing
This course is designed for both academic
and industrial scientists interested in parallel
computing and its applications to largescale scientific and engineering problems. It
focuses on the three main issues in parallel
computing: analysis of parallel hardware and
software systems, design and implementation
of parallel algorithms, and applications of
parallel computing to selected problems
in physical science and engineering. The
course emphasizes hands-on practice and
understanding of algorithmic concepts of
parallel computing.
Prerequisite: A course in basic computer
science such as operating systems or
architectures or some programming
experience.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
AMS 531: Laboratory Rotations in
Computational Biology
This is a two semester course in which first
year Ph.D. students spend at least 8 weeks in
each of three different laboratories actively
participating in the research of participating
Computational Biology Faculty. At the end of
each rotation, students give a presentation of
their lab activates and accomplishments. The
primary goal of rotations is to help students
choose a research advisor and to help faculty
members choose students. Students register
for AMS 531 in both the Fall and Spring
semesters of the first year.
0-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
AMS 532: Journal Club in
Computational Biology
The goal of this course is for students to
hone critical reading and analytic skills
through discussions of literature in the area
of Computational Biology. Participants
take turn being a "discussion leader" who
informally guides the group through a peerreviewed manuscript for which all Journal
Club members will have to read in advance
of the meeting. Meetings in the Spring
semester will include in Person Training
(IPT) in Responsible conduct of Research and
Scholarship (RCRS) on topics that comprise
(1) Integrity in Scholarship, (2) Scientific
Misconduct, (3) Mentoring, (4) Ownership
and Authorship, (5) Plagiarism, (6) Data
Management, (7) Journalism and Science, (8)
Human Subjects, and (9) Laboratory Animals.
0-1 credits, S/U grading

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

8

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
May be repeated for credit.
AMS 533: Numerical Methods and
Algorithms in Computational Biology
An in-depth survey of many of the key
techniques used in diverse aspects of
computational biology. A major focus of this
class is on how to successfully formulate a
statement of the problem to be solved, and
how that formulation can guide in selecting
the most suitable computational approach.
Examples will be drawn from a wide range
of problems in biology, including molecular
modeling, biochemical reaction networks,
microscopy and systems biology. No prior
knowledge of biology is required.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 534: Introduction to Systems
Biology
This course is geared towards teaching
essential concepts and computational skills in
Systems Biology. The course is centered upon
two key programming languages: Matlab for
modeling applications and the R language for
statistical analysis and sequence manipulation.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
AMS 535: Introduction to
Computational Structural Biology and
Drug Design
This course will provide an introduction
to Computational Structural Biology with
application to Drug Design. Methods and
applications that use computation to model
biological systems involved in human disease
will be emphasized. The course aims to foster
collaborative learning and will consist of
presentations by the instructor, guest lecturers,
and by course participants with the goal
of summarizing key, methods, topics, and
papers relevant to Computational Structural
Biology. Grades are based on the quality of the
presentations, participation in class discussion,
attendance, quizzes, and a final exam.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 536: Molecular Modeling of
Biological Molecules
This computer-based lab course is designed for
students who wish to gain hands an experience
modeling biological molecules at the atomic
level. In conjunction with individual interests,
Molecular Mechanics, Molecular dynamics,
Monte Carlo, Docking (virtual screening),
or Quantum Mechanics software packages
can be used to study relevant biological
systems (s). Projects will include setup,
execution, and analysis. Course participants
will give literature presentations relevant to
the simulations being performed and a final

Spring 2021
project report will be required. Familiarity with 0-1 credits, S/U grading
Unix (Linux) is desirable but not mandatory.
AMS 540: Linear Programming
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Formulation of linear programming
problems and solutions by simplex method.
AMS 537: Biological Dynamics and
Duality, sensitivity analysis, dual simplex
Networks
algorithm, decomposition. Applications to the
This course will provide a solid foundation
transportation problem, two-person games,
in key theoretical concepts for the study of
assignment problem, and introduction to
dynamics in biological systems and networks
integer and nonlinear programming.
at different scales ranging from the molecular
level to metabolic and gene regulatory
networks. Topics of this course include
but are not limited to: Physical kinetics;
Diffusion/Smoluchowskii; Random flights;
Waiting times; Poisson; Brownian ratchets;
Chemical kinetics; Transition states; Stability,
bifurcations, pattern development; Noise
in cells: intrinsic and Extrinsic; Feedback;
Biological Osciillators; Recurrence, period
doubling, chaos; Networks; Topologies;
Degree distribution, betweenness; Models of
nets: Erdos-Renyi, scale-free, social, WattsStrogatz, agents; Robustness, highly-optimized
tolerance, bowties, epidemics; Biological
networks: Protein-protein nets, regulatory and
metabolic nets; Known biological circuits
and their behaviors; How networks evolve:
Preferential attachment, rewiring; Power
laws; Fluxed through networks; Information
and communication, entropy; Metabolic flux
analysis; Artificial and Natural selection
for traits; Darwinian evolution; Population
dynamics.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
AMS 538: Methods in Neuronal
Modeling
Presentation of the mathematical modeling
approach to information processing in nervous
systems, from the level of individual ionic
channels to large-scale neuronal networks.
The course covers kinetic models of synaptic
transmission, cable theory and compartment
models for neurons, multiple channels and
calcium dynamics, spike-train analysis and
modeling small neuron networks.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
AMS 539: Introduction to Physical and
Quantitative Biology
This course is a seminar series organized
by the Laufer Center for Physical and
Quantitative Biology and is aimed at any
incoming graduate students who might be
interested in doing research in computational,
mathematical or physical biology. Each
seminar will be given by a different faculty
member about their research and will span a
range of topics including computational cell
biology and evolutionary models.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 542: Analysis of Algorithms
Techniques for designing efficient algorithms,
including choice of data structures, recursion,
branch and bound, divide and conquer, and
dynamic programming. Complexity analysis
of searching, sorting, matrix multiplication,
and graph algorithms. Standard NP-complete
problems and polynomial transformation
techniques. This course is offered as both
AMS 542 and CSE 548.
Prerequisite for CSE 548: CSE 373
recommended
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
AMS 544: Discrete and Nonlinear
Optimization
Theoretical and computational properties of
discrete and nonlinear optimization problems:
integer programming, including cutting plane
and branch and bound algorithms, necessary
and sufficient conditions for optimality of
nonlinear programs, and performance of
selected nonlinear programming algorithms.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 545: Computational Geometry
Study of the fundamental algorithmic problems
associated with geometric computations,
including convex hulls, Voronoi diagrams,
triangulation, intersection, range queries,
visibility, arrangements, and motion
planning for robotics. Algorithmic methods
include plane sweep, incremental insertion,
randomization, divide-and-conquer, etc. This
course is offered as both AMS 545 and CSE
555.
Prerequisite for CSE 555: CSE 373 or CSE
548
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
AMS 546: Network Flows
Theory of flows in capacity-constrained
networks. Topics include maximum flow,
feasibility criteria, scheduling problems,
matching and covering problems, minimumlength paths, minimum-cost flows, and
associated combinatorial problems.
9

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 547: Discrete Mathematics
This course introduces such mathematical
tools as summations, number theory, binomial
coefficients, generating functions, recurrence
relations, discrete probability, asymptotics,
combinatorics, and graph theory for use in
algorithmic and combinatorial analysis. This
course is offered as both CSE 547 and AMS
547.
Prerequisite for CSE 547: AMS 301
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
AMS 548: Optimization techniques in
biomolecular simulations
This practical hands-on course will teach basic
techniques for building mathematical models,
algorithms, and software for biomolecular
simulations of macromolecular interactions.
The topics of this course include, but are not
limited to: the basics of statistical mechanics
and its connection to the sampling algorithms;
the origin of and approximations for the
computation of molecular forces; geometry
of the molecular configuration search space
and multidimensional optimization; basics
of software development and programming
for high performance computing (HPC).
During the course, the students will develop
a multiscale approach for modeling proteinprotein interactions from the ground up. No
special background is required. Offered in the
Spring Semester
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring 2021
Elements of cooperative and non-cooperative
games. Matrix games, pure and mixed
strategies, and equilibria. Solution concepts
such as core, stable sets, and bargaining sets.
Voting games, and the Shapley and Banzhaff
power indices. This course is offered as both
ECO 604 and AMS 552. Prerequisite for ECO
604: Graduate standing in the Economics
Department or permission of the Graduate
Director.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 553: Simulation and Modeling
A comprehensive course in formulation,
implementation, and application of simulation
models. Topics include data structures,
simulation languages, statistical analysis,
pseudo-random number generation, and design
of simulation experiments. Students apply
simulation modeling methods to problems of
their own design. This course is offered as
CSE 529, AMS 553 and MBA 553.

AMS 550: Operations Research:
Stochastic Models
Includes Poisson processes, renewal theory,
discrete-time and continuous-time Markov
processes, Brownian motion, applications
to queues, statistics, and other problems of
engineering and social sciences. Prerequisite:
AMS 507 or equivalent
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 552: Game Theory I

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 560: Big Data Systems,
Algorithms and Networks
Recent progress on big data systems,
algorithms and networks. Topics include
the web graph, search engines, targeted
advertisements, online algorithms and
competitive analysis, and analytics, storage,
resource allocation, and security in big data
systems. Offered in the Spring Semester
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

AMS 561: Introduction to
Computational Science
This course provides a foundation of
knowledge and basic skills for the successful
application in graduate research of modern
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
techniques in computational and data science
relevant to engineering, the humanities, and
AMS 555: Game Theory II
the physical, life and social sciences. It is
Refinements of strategic equilibrium, games
consciously crafted to provide a rich, projectwith incomplete information, repeated games
oriented, multidisciplinary experience that
with and without complete information, and
establishes a common vocabulary and skill
stochastic games. The Shapley value of games set. Centered around the popular programming
with many players, and NTU-values. This
language Python, the course will serve as an
course is offered as both ECO 605 and AMS
introduction to programming including data
555.
structures, algorithms, numerical methods,
Prerequisite for AMS 555: AMS 552/ECO 604. basic concepts in computer architecture,
and elements of object-oriented design.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
Also introduced will be important concepts
etc.)
and tools associated with the analysis and
management of data, both big and small,
AMS 556: Dynamic Programming
including basic statistical modeling in R,
Stochastic and deterministic multistage
aspects of machine learning and data mining,
optimization problems. Stochastic path
data management, and visualization. No
problems. Principle of optimality. Recursive
previous computing experience is assumed.
and functional equations. Method of
Students are assumed to have taken some
successive approximations and policy
introductory courses in two of these three
iteration. Applications to finance, economics,
math subjects: linear algebra, calculus, and
inventory control, maintenance, inspection,
probability.
and replacement problems.

AMS 549: Computational Biology
This course focuses on current problems in
computational biology and bioinformatics.
Our emphasis will be algorithmic, on
discovering appropriate combinatorial
algorithm problems and the techniques to
solve them. Primary topics will include DNA
sequence assembly, DNA/protein sequence
comparison, hybridization array analysis, RNA
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
and protein folding, and phylogenic trees.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

in real systems. The goal of the course is to
provide rigorous foundations for the study of
smart energy management for sustainability.
Offered in the Spring Semester

AMS 559: Smart Energy in the
Information Age
Energy and sustainability have become critical
issues of our generation. While the abundant
potential of renewable energy sources, such
as solar and wind, provides a real opportunity
for sustainability, their intermittency and
uncertainty present a daunting operational
challenge. This course studies how to use
Information Technology (IT) to improve
sustainability in our energy-hungry society.
In particular, topics include the applications
of mathematical modeling, algorithm design,
optimization, game theory, and control theory

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 562: Introduction to Scientific
Programming in C++
This course provides students with
foundational skills and knowledge in practical
scientific programming relevant for scientists
and engineers. The primary language is C+
+ since it is a widely-used, object-oriented
language, includes C as a subset, and is a
powerful tool for writing robust, complex,
high-performance software. Elements of
Python, Bash, and other languages will be
introduced to complement the capabilities
of C++, and essential tools for software
development and engineering will be
employed throughout the course (e.g.,
10

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
makefiles, version control, online code
repositories, debugging, etc.).
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 565: Wave Propagation
Theory of propagation of vector and scalar
waves in bounded and unbounded regions.
Development of methods of geometrical
optics. Propagation in homogeneous and
anisotropic media.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 566: Compressible Fluid
Dynamics
Physical, mathematical, and computational
description in compressible fluid flows.
Integral and differential forms of the
conservation equations, one-dimensional
flow, shocks and expansion waves in two
and three dimensions, quasi-one-dimensional
flow, transient flow, numerical methods for
steady supersonic flow, numerical methods for
transient flow.

Spring 2021
such as the t-test and chi-square test.
Procedures to verify that assumptions are
satisfied. Extensions of simple procedures
to more complex situations and introduction
to one-way analysis of variance. Basic
exploratory data analysis procedures (stem
and leaf plots, straightening regression lines,
and techniques to establish equal variance).
Offered as AMS 572 or HPH 698.
Prerequisite: AMS 312 or permission of
instructor
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 573: Categorical Data Analysis
Measuring the strength of association between
pairs of categorical variables. Methods for
evaluating classification procedures and interrater agreement. Analysis of the associations
among three or more categorical variables
using log linear models. Logistic regression.
Prerequisite: AMS 572
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

AMS 575: Internship in Statistical
Consulting
Directed quantitative research problem in
AMS 569: Probability Theory I
conjunction with currently existing research
Probability spaces and sigma-algebras.
programs outside the department. Students
Random variables as measurable mappings.
specializing in a particular area work on
Borel-Cantelli lemmas. Expectation using
a problem from that area; others work on
simple functions. Monotone and dominated
convergence theorems. Inequalities. Stochastic problems related to their interests, if possible.
convergence. Characteristic functions. Laws of Efficient and effective use of computers. Each
student gives at least one informal lecture to
large numbers and the central limit theorem.
his or her colleagues on a research problem
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
and its statistical aspects.
AMS 570: Introduction to Mathematical
Statistics
Probability and distributions; multivariate
distributions; distributions of functions of
random variables; sampling distributions;
limiting distributions; point estimation;
confidence intervals; sufficient statistics;
Bayesian estimation; maximum likelihood
estimation; statistical tests.

1-9 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

AMS 571: Mathematical Statistics
Sampling distribution; convergence concepts;
classes of statistical models; sufficient
statistics; likelihood principle; point
estimation; Bayes estimators; consistence;
Neyman-Pearson Lemma; UMP tests; UMPU
tests; Likelihood ratio tests; large sample
theory. Offered as HPH 697 or AMS 571.
Prerequisite: AMS 570

AMS 578: Regression Theory
Classical least-squares theory for regression
including the Gauss-Markov theorem
and classical normal statistical theory.
An introduction to stepwise regression,
procedures, and exploratory data analysis
techniques. Analysis of variance problems as
a subject of regression. Brief discussions of
robustness of estimation and robustness of
design. Prerequisite: AMS 572

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 572: Data Analysis I
Introduction to basic statistical procedures.
Survey of elementary statistical procedures

AMS 577: Multivariate Analysis
The multivariate distribution. Estimation of
the mean vector and covariance matrix of the
multivariate normal. Discriminant analysis.
Canonical correlation. Principal components.
Factor analysis. Cluster analysis.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 580: Statistical Learning

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

This course will first review classical linear
and generalized linear models such as Linear
Regression, and Linear Discriminant Analysis.
We shall then study modern Resampling
Methods such as Bootstrapping, and modern
variable selection methods such as the
Shrinkage Method. Finally, we shall introduce
modern non-linear statistical learning methods
such as the Generalized Additive Models,
Decision Trees, Random Forest, Boosting,
Bagging, and, Support Vector Machines.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 581: Analysis of Variance
Analysis of models with fixed effects. The
Gauss-Markov theorem; construction of
confidence ellipsoids and tests with Gaussian
observations. Problems of multiple tests of
hypotheses. One-way, two-way, and higherway layouts. Analysis of incomplete designs
such as Latin squares and incomplete blocks.
Analysis of covariance problems.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 582: Design of Experiments
Discussion of the accuracy of experiments,
partitioning sums of squares, randomized
designs, factorial experiments, Latin squares,
confounding and fractional replication,
response surface experiments, and incomplete
block designs. Offered as AMS 582 or HPH
699. Prerequisite: AMS 572
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 583: Applied Longitudinal Data
Analysis
Longitudinal data takes the form of repeated
measurements of the same subject (humans,
animals, plants, samples, etc) over time (or
other conditions). This type of data has a
broad range of applications, including public
health, medical research, pharmaceutical
studies, life sciences, agriculture, engineering
and physical sciences. Longitudinal data
analysis allows one to study the changes
in mean response over time and answer
other scientific questions pertaining to the
relationship between the response and time.
This course aims to introduce statistical
models and methods for the analysis of
longitudinal data. Both the classical (univariate
and multivariate repeated analysis of variance)
and more recent approaches (1) general linear
models for correlation, random coefficient
models, linear mixed effect models for normal
repeated measurements; (2) generalized
linear models for non-normal response and
population-averaged models (generalized
estimating equations) for non-normal repeated
measurements, of analyzing longitudinal data
will be covered in this course. Offered in the
Spring Semester
11

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 585: Internship in Data Science
Directed data science problem in conjunction
with currently existing research programs
outside the department. Students specializing
in a particular area work on a problem from
that area; others work on problems related
to their interests, if possible. Efficient and
effective use of computers. Each student
gives at least one informal lecture to his or
her colleagues on a research problem and its
statistical aspects.
1-9 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
AMS 586: Time Series
Analysis in the frequency domain.
Periodograms, approximate tests, relation to
regression theory. Pre-whitening and digital
fibers. Common data windows. Fast Fourier
transforms. Complex demodulation, Gibbs'
phenomenon issues. Time-domain analysis.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 587: Nonparametric Statistics
This course covers the applied nonparametric
statistical procedures: one-sample Wilcoxon
tests, two-sample Wilcoxon tests, runs
test, Kruskal-Wallis test, Kendall's tau,
Spearman's rho, Hodges-Lehman estimation,
Friedman analysis of variance on ranks. The
course gives the theoretical underpinnings
to these procedures, showing how existing
techniques may be extended and new
techniques developed. An excursion into the
new problems of multivariate nonparametric
inference is made.
Prerequisites: AMS 312 and AMS 572 or
equivalents
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 588: Failure and Survival Data
Analysis
This course introduces both parametric
and non-parametric statistical models for
analysis of the failure and survival data
¿ a critical topic in quantitative finance,
econometrics, and biostatistics. Different
censoring mechanisms will be discussed.
The course will mainly cover Kaplan-Meier
estimator for characterizing the distribution of
the failure and survival data, non-parametric
log-rank test for comparing multiple groups,
and the accelerated failure time model and
Cox regression model uncovering various
predictor/explanatory variables to survival/
failure. Applications to finance, economics
and biomedicine will be illustrated. We have
revised the course title and content to better
suit our current graduate programs in Applied
Mathematics and Statistics that have evolved

Spring 2021
substantially from our old forms. In our
current program, students from many tracks,
especially in statistics and in quantitative
finance, need this updated course as a highly
relevant and important elective. This same
subject is generally referred to as `Survival
data analysis¿ in biostatistics, but `Failure data
analysis¿ in finance. This updated title will
reflect the content of the course clearly for
students from all tracks.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 589: Quantitative Genetics
Definition of relevant terminology. Statistical
and genetic models for inheritance of
quantitative traits. Estimation of effects of
selection, dominance polygenes, epistatis, and
environment. Linkage studies and threshold
characteristics.
Spring, odd years, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 591: Topics for M.S. Students
Various topics of current interest in applied
mathematics will be offered if sufficient
interest is shown. Several topics may be taught
concurrently in different sections.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
AMS 592: Mathematical Methods of
Finance and Investments I
A broad-based course in mathematical
modeling and quantitative analysis of financial
transactions and investment management
issues such as debt and equity, measures of
risk and returns, efficient markets and efficient
set mathematics, asset pricing, one-factor and
multiple-factor models, portfolio selection,
futures and options.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 593: Interest Rate and Credit
Modeling
Introduction to most commonly used interest
rate models: Heath-Jarrow-Morton, BraceGatareck-Musiela, etc. Cap, Floor, European
and Bermudian option pricing. Credit
Modeling: Merton structural approach vs.
Intensity approach. Corporate bonds, CDS,
securitized products (CDO, CLO, mortages),
Credit value adjustment (CVA, XVA).
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 594: Mathematical Methods of
Finance and Investments II
This course employs the techniques of
mathematical statistics and empirical finance,
e.g., estimation theory, linear and nonlinear
regression, time series analysis, modeling
and simulation to examine critically various

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

models of prediction for asset-pricing, pricing
of derivative products and term-structure of
interest rates assuming stochastic volatility.
Statistics necessary for analysis is incorporated
in the course.
Prerequisite: AMS 592
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 595: Fundamentals of Computing
Introduction to UNIX operating system,
C language, graphics, and parallel
supercomputing.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 596: Fundamentals of LargeScale Computing
Overview of the design and maintenance
of large scale computer projects in
applied mathematics, including basic
programming techniques for massively parallel
supercomputers.
Prerequisite: AMS 595 or permission of
instructor
Spring, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 597: Statistical Computing
Introduction to statistical computing using
SAS and S plus.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 598: Big Data Analysis
The rapid advancement of modern
technologies in all walks of research and
business has introduced tremendous amount
of data and the related big data mining tasks
such as real-time credit card processing and
fraud detection, high dimensional RNA
sequencing analysis, and risk management
of high frequency trading data measured in
milliseconds. Traditional data processing and
analysis techniques are no longer adequate
-- they have to be revised and customized to
parallel computing paradigms, at the same
time, modern data mining tools are being
created and evolved, at their own fast pace,
to accommodate the analysis of various big
data problems. This course is subsequently
created to enable the timely education of a
new generation of competent data analysts.
This course introduces the application of the
supercomputing to statistical data analyses,
particularly on big data. Implementations
of various statistical methodologies
within parallel computing framework are
demonstrated through all lectures. The course
will cover (1) parallel computing basics,
including architecture on interconnection
networks, communications methodologies,
algorithm and performance measurements,
and (2) their applications to modern data
mining techniques, including modern variable
12

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
selection/Dimension reduction, linear/logistical
regression, tree-based classification methods,
Kernel-based methods, non-linear statistical
models, and model inference/Resampling
methods. Prerequisites: AMS 572, AMS 573
and AMS 578
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 599: Research
Thesis research for Doctoral students who
have not yet advanced to candidacy. Master's
students may also enroll, but must have
approval from a faculty advisor before
registering. Pre-requisite: Student must obtain
consent from individual faculty advisor in
order to register for AMS 599 under his/her
section. 1-12 credits, S/U grading, may be
repeated for credit.
1-12 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
AMS 600: Socially Responsible
Investing
Introduction to a scope of investments
which are socially responsible because of
the nature of the business the company
conducts, including but not limited to:
avoiding investment in companies that
produce or sell addictive substances (like
alcohol, gambling, and tobacco) and seeking
out companies engaged in environmental
sustainability. The course includes analysis
of investments strategies maximizing
financial return as well as social goods,
such as: (i) Negative Screening: excluding
securities with potentially social and/or
environmental harmful characteristics; (ii)
Shareholder activism: activities steering the
management towards enhancing the well being
of the stockholders, customers, employees,
vendors, and communities. (iii) Positive
investing: making investments in activities
and companies believed to have a positive
impact on issues such as social justice and
the environment through stock selection, that
guarantees sustainability, in environmental and
humanitarian sense, and providing a company's
long term potential to compete and succeed.
Offered in Fall.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 601: Risk Management and
Business Risk Control in BRIC
Countries
Introduction to the challenges and
opportunities in investing in the BRIC
countries Brazil, Russia, India, and China,
with emphasis in the risk assessment, control
and management. Opportunities in investing
in BRIC: growth in infrastructure, middle
class demand, educated cheap workforce,
potential for outsourcing work, high risk/

Spring 2021
high reward. Risks facing investors in BRIC:
strategic, operational, political, market risk,
credit risks. Cultural barriers: family owned
businesses, lack of business professionalism,
poor transparency and disclosures of business
practices, shallow and volatile markets,
unstable macro-economics policies, tardy
legal system. Responsibilities of investors
in the BRIC countries: helping the BRIC
governments and corporations in smooth
transition to global markets and to developed
status, providing co-ordination and transfer
of business knowledge and technology from
risk professionals in developed countries to
emerging markets. Offered in Fall.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 603: Risk Measures For Finance
& Data Analysis
Risk analysis is important to quantitative
finance, insurance, commercial credit and
many areas of data analysis. We emphasize
risk analysis methods that capture observed
features of risk, such as heavy tails, and
validation of risk models against observed
data. Students will be graded on the basis
of project drawn from multiple asset classes
considered in the course work, including fixed
income, options, portfolio optimization and
foreign exchange. Professional standards for
software development will be followed. Guest
lectures by industry leaders are anticipated.
Participation via conferencing software will be
available as an option to class attendance.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
AMS 621: Finite Element Methods for
Partial Differential Equations
Variational form of the problem, Ritz
Galerkins, collocation, and mixed methods;
triangular, rectangular (2-D), and tetrahedral
(3-D) elements; accuracy, convergence, and
stability; solutions of linear, nonlinear steadystate, and dynamic problems; implicit and
explicit time integration; equivalence of finiteelement and finite-difference methods.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 641: Special Topics in
Mathematical Programming
The course is designed for second- and
third-year graduate students with a strong
foundation in linear algebra and analysis
who wish to pursue research in applied
mathematics. Varying topics from nonlinear
programming and optimization to applied
graph theory and applied combinatorics may
be offered concurrently.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

AMS 644: Special Topics in Applied
Probability
The course is designed for second- and thirdyear graduate students with a background
in probability and stochastic modeling who
wish to pursue research in applications of
the probability theory. Several topics may be
taught concurrently in different sections.
Prerequisites: AMS 550 and permission of
instructor
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
AMS 651: Nonlinear Analysis and
Optimization
Iterative methods for solving nonlinear
operator equations. Frechet differentials. The
Newton-Raphson method in function space
and nonlinear boundary value problems. The
Courant penalty concept and constrained
optimization. General multiplier rules.
Variable metric gradient projection for
nonlinear least-square methods, with
applications.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
AMS 652: Special Topics in Game
Theory
The course is designed for second- and thirdyear graduate students who wish to specialize
in the mathematical theory of games.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
AMS 670: Special Topics in Probability
and Mathematical Statistics
The course is designed for second- and
third-year graduate students with a strong
foundation in analysis and statistics who wish
to pursue research in mathematical statistics.
Several topics may be taught concurrently in
different sections.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
AMS 675: Special Topics in Applied
Statistics
The course is designed for second- and thirdyear students with a strong foundation in
statistical analysis who wish to pursue research
in applied statistics.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
AMS 676: Internship in Applied
Mathematics
Directed research and/or practical experience
in industry, financial and consulting firms,
and research institutions. Students are required
to have a department faculty adviser who

13

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

coordinates and supervises the internship.
Submission of the final report is required.

0-3 Credits, S/U Grading, May be repeated for
credit.

1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

0-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

AMS 683: Biological Physics &
Biophysical Chemistry: Theoretical
Perspectives
This course will survey a selected number
of topics in biological physics and
biophysical chemistry. The emphasis is on
the understanding of physical organization
principles and fundamental mechanisms
involved in the biological process. The
potential topics include: Protein Folding,
Protein Dynamics, Biomolecular Interactions
and Recognition, Electron and Proton Transfer,
Motors, Membranes, Single Molecules and
Single Cells, Cellular Networks, Development
and Differentiation, Brains and Neural
Systems, Evolution. There will be no
homework or exams. The grades will be
based on the performance of the term projects.
Crosslisted with PHY 680 and CHE 683.

AMS 698: Practicum in Teaching
Undergraduate teaching to be supervised by a
faculty member of the Applied Mathematics
and Statistics program. Course to be identified
by the student and Graduate Program Director.
May be repeated for credit

0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

AMS 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.

AMS 690: Special Topics in Differential
Equations and Applied Analysis
The course is designed for second- and
third-year graduate students with a strong
foundation in analysis who wish to pursue
research in applied mathematics. Several
topics may be taught concurrently in different
sections.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
AMS 691: Topics in Applied
Mathematics
Varying topics selected from the list below
if sufficient interest is shown. Several topics
may be taught concurrently in different
sections: Advanced Operational Methods in
Applied Mathematics Approximate Methods
in Boundary Value Problems in Applied
Mathematics Control Theory and Optimization
Foundations of Passive Systems Theory Game
Theory Mixed Boundary Value Problems
in Elasticity Partial Differential Equations
Quantitative Genetics Stochastic Modeling
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
AMS 695: Special Topics in Numerical
Analysis and Scientific Computing
Analysis and Scientific Computing
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
AMS 696: Applied Mathematics
Seminar

3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
AMS 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research must take
place on SBU campus, at Cold Spring Harbor,
or at the Brookhaven National Lab.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 0-9 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.

Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
AMS 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
in MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.
All international students must received
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

AMS 800: SUMMER RESEARCH
May be repeated for credit.

ANT
Anthropology
ANT 501: Development of
Anthropological Theory
Survey of the development of anthropological
theory from the 19th century to the present.
This course is offered as both ANT 501 and
DPA 501.
Spring, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ANT 502: Social Ecology
This course explores theoretical and
methodological issues in the study of
human social activity and its relationship
to ecological systems and the environment.
Readings include both classic studies as well
as contemporary research, with particular
emphasis placed on the various dimensions
and scales of social organization and activity,
and on the role of cultural, religious, and
political institutions in shaping ecological
relationship as well as economic behavior.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ANT 503: Social Organization
This course explores theoretical models
and empirical observations of human social
organization in a comparative perspective,
including such topics as demography and
behavioral ecology, kinship and marriage,
reciprocal exchange, and political dimensions
of resource mobilization in small-scale as
well as complex societies. Organized around
different layers of human sociality, the
course examines social dependence among
humans and nonhuman primates, evolutionary
explanations for human mating strategies,
cooperation in child-rearing, paradigms of
descent and affinity, and the dynamics of
hierarchy and alliance in egalitarian cultures as
well as stratified states.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ANT 504: Ecology of the Turkana Basin
This course introduces students to the
fundamental principles and techniques of
field ecology in the context of the modern
East African Lake Turkana environment.
The course includes a mixture of fieldwork,
lectures, seminars, readings, presentations, and
independent research and writing assignments.
Emphasis will be on identification of common
and important species around and near the
Turkana Basin Institute (TBI) at Turkwel
14

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
as well as the recognition of important
evolutionary and ecological patterns and
issues. Fieldwork focuses on plants and
insects and aims to generate useful baseline
data for longer term studies. Students will
be introduced to some basic ecological
monitoring methods for plant and insect
communities such as topics including
mutualism, phenology, invasive species
and restoration ecology. We will be looking
closely at adaptation to heat stress/high
temperatures during this module as well as
simple systems around TBI. Students will be
exposed to a variety of habitats including the
riverine forests and dryland grassland areas
around the Turkana Basin Institute as well
as the rich freshwater and island systems of
Lake Turkana. Semesters offered- Fall and
Spring. Components- laboratory, lecture, and
recitation.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ANT 505: Vertebrate Paleontology &
Paleoecology of the Turkana Basin
Vertebrate fossils are important sources of
information about the appearance, evolution,
and extinction of major organisms. As
such, they provide a valuable window onto
changes in climate and selection pressures,
and organisms' diverse adaptive responses to
these changes. They are also significant in
placing hominid discoveries within a relative
local chronology, and helping reconstruct
environments associated with hominid
fluids. This course acquaints students with
laboratory and field methods of paleontology
employed in different chronological contexts
of the Turkana Basin, used to solve diverse
theoretical questions. Graded work includes
fieldwork and lab assignments, independent
research assignments, quizzes and a final
exam. Semesters offered- Fall and Spring.
Components- laboratory, lecture, and
recitation.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ANT 506: Human Evolution the
Turkana Basin
The Turkana Basin is home to many
paleoanthropological discoveries that
fundamentally reshape ideas about human
evolution. Important finds from the Turkana
Basin, including Nariokotome ("Turkana
Boy") and KNM-WT 17000 (the "Black
Skull") will be highlighted in lectures and lab
activities, and their relevance to the larger
picture of human evolution will be explored.
Lectures and readings for each discovery
will cover: 1) the research questions and
strategies that led to the find; 2) the kinds of
analyses that have yielded the most important
interpretive conclusions about the find; 3) how

Spring 2021
this discovery reshaped views of the human
past; 4) what new directions it catalyzed in
human evolutions research. Class activities
consists of lectures, field and laboratory
exercises (reconstructions, measurements)
using casts of a wide range of primate fossils,
and field trip to locations. Students will learn
how to classify and identify fossils. Graded
work includes fieldwork and lab assignments,
independent research assignments, quizzes
and a final exam. Semesters offered- Fall and
Spring. Components- laboratory, lecture, and
recitation.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ANT 507: Archaeology of the Turkana
Basin
This course familiarizes students with
Africa Stone Age archaeology through class
lectures and lab exercises. Students learn
how archaeologists document the behavioral
characteristics of early humans in Africa
through study of material cultural evidence.
During field excursions, they learn diverse
methods of survey and excavation techniques
appropriate for different sites and contexts.
Primary areas of discussion throughout
the coursework include the question of the
cognitive status of early humans implied by
their technologies and the evolution of human
adaptation from an evolutionary perspective,
exploring the relationship between stone tool
technology, paleoenvironments, hominin
species, and cognitive evolution. Graded
work includes fieldwork and lab assignments,
independent research assignments, quizzes
and a final exam. Semesters offered- Fall and
Spring. Components- laboratory, lecture, and
recitation.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ANT 508: Paleoanthropological Field
Methods in the Turkana Basin
This course is one of three that constitutes the
Turkana Basin Institute Summer Field School,
an opportunity to participate in all aspects
of a paleoanthropological research project,
focusing on practical aspects of vertebrate
paleontology, geology, zooarchaeology
and taphonomy. Students are trained in
field reconnaissance, fossil survey, plotting,
preservation, and collection, analysis and
interpretation. Hands-on examination of fossils
from Plio-Pleistocene or Holocene sites around
Lake Turkana will teach students how human
ancestors and other animals adapted to the
environments around them. Experts from TBI,
Stony Brook, and other institutions provide
instruction in lectures, labs, and via fieldwork
within the context of on-going projects.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

ANT 509: Seminar in European
Ethnography
Investigation and discussion of selected topics
and problems concerning European societies
and cultures. The perspectives of culture
history and current fieldwork are employed.
This course is offered as both ANT 509 and
DPA 509.
Fall, 3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ANT 510: Environments, Ecosystems
and Evolution: Evidence from the
Turkana Basin
An introduction to the ways scientists use
the fossil and archaeological records to learn
about past changes in Earth's climates and
environments, and how humanity's ancestors
responded to those changes physiologically
and technologically. Interdisciplinary lectures
will show evidence from the Turkana Basin's
paleoenvironmental, fossil and archaeological
records of the dynamic interactions between
the climate, environment, local food webs,
and ancient human populations. This
background will prepare students for training
in paleoanthropological and archaeological
field methods.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ANT 511: Paleolithic Archaeology
A survey of the archaeological record of
foraging peoples in Africa, Europe, and
Asia prior to the emergence of agriculture.
The course emphasizes particular problems
including the relationship between behavioral
and biological change, different adaptive
strategies in temperate and tropical zones, the
origins of modern humans, and the emergence
of complex hunter-gatherer societies. This
course is offered as both ANT 511 and DPA
511.
Prerequisite: Any other archaeology course.
Fall, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ANT 512: Comparative Civilizations
A comparative study of the processes of
sociocultural evolution from the beginnings
of sedentary life to the achievement of early
civilization in the Near East, Egypt, the
Indus Valley, China, Mesoamerica, and the
Andean area. The seminar covers such topics
as urbanization, demography, irrigation,
craft specialization, militarism, and trade and
exchange. This course is offered as both ANT
512 and DPA 512.
Prerequisite: Graduate standing or permission
of instructor
Spring, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
15

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
ANT 513: Origins of Agriculture
This course will trace the history of
anthropological thought on the origins of
agriculture and will assess the evidence from
the Old and New worlds for this economic
revolution. The course will not only explore
areas where early agriculture is evidenced, but
will also contrast these areas with those where
agriculture was a later development. Emphasis
will be on the environmental, technological,
biological, social, and cultural processes
associated with the "Neolithic Revolution."
This course is offered as both ANT 513 and
DPA 513.
Fall, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ANT 514: Human Osteology
A detailed study of the anatomy of the
human skeleton with special emphasis on
the interpretation of skeletal remains from
archaeological contexts. Consideration is
given to the growth, structure, and function
of bones, and to forensic aspects such as
the determination of age, sex, stature, and
pathology from skeletal remains. Students
conduct a research project on a human
skeleton.
4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
ANT 515: Theory and Method in
Archaeology
Theoretical and methodological approaches
employed in archaeology. The goals of the
course are to provide an historical perspective
on the growth of theory and method in
archaeology and to examine in detail some
of the pertinent research topics being studied
today. This course is offered as both ANT 515
and DPA 515.
Fall, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ANT 516: Research Design in
Archaeology
An examination of the ways in which
archaeologists develop successful research
strategies for arriving at answers to the key
questions in the field. Students will analyze
grant proposals that received funding from
the major sources of funding for archaeology
before developing research proposals of their
own. The aim of the course is to provide the
class with the skills needed to plan their future
and compete successfully for funding both for
their thesis research and in their future careers.
Fall, alternate years, 4 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
ANT 517: Primitive Technology
An introduction to the technology of
hunter-gatherers. The course examines how

Spring 2021
archaeologists use both ethnographic and
experimentation to shed light on prehistoric
human technological adaptations. Techniques
for making and using primitive tools are
practiced in weekly laboratory sessions.

An introduction to the use of aerial and
satellite imagery in environmental analysis and
the manipulation of geographic data sets of all
types using Geographic Information Systems.
This course is designed to teach students
in archaeology, physical anthropology,
Fall, alternate years, 4 credits, Letter graded
and related disciplines, how satellite
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
imagery combined with various maps can be
May be repeated for credit.
manipulated using GIS software to perform
powerful geographic analysis. Although
ANT 518: Lithic Technology
students are eventually likely to use these
A detailed overview of the methods
tools in many different parts of the world, this
archaeologists use to extract behavioral
course focuses on Long Island as a research
information from prehistoric stone tools.
area, and each student designs and completes
The course examines raw material economy,
a research project on a particular section of
technological strategies, tool use, and discard
the area, focusing on the habitats of local
behavior. Analytical methods are practiced
through the computer-assisted analysis of stone wildlife, the locations of archaeological sites,
coastal regimes, etc. This course presumes
tools from simulated archaeological sites.
computer literacy and familiarity with database
Spring, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
management. Offered as ANT 526 and DPA
etc.)
526 or HPH 658.
ANT 519: Archaeozoology
An introduction to the study of animal bones
from archaeological sites. Special emphasis
is on identification of fragmented bone,
identification of bone surface modification,
calculation of indexes of abundance, and
measurement and metrical analysis of mammal
bone. Computer analysis is stressed, and the
class seeks to synthesize traditional archaeozoology and actualistic studies. This course is
offered as both ANT 519 and DPA 519.

Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

ANT 527: Field Methods and
Techniques in Archaeology
The course will be held during the summer
only. It consists of field and laboratory work
on an aspect of Long Island's archaeological
heritage. Students' time is divided between
surveying and excavation in the field and
artifact analysis in the laboratory. Such
techniques as map and air photo reading,
Fall, odd years, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
survey, instruments, stratigraphy, conservation,
B+, etc.)
typology construction, etc. are taught.
Students are exposed to the full range of
ANT 520: Principles of Social and
excavation, survey, and laboratory methods
Cultural Anthropology
and techniques. This course is offered as both
Concepts and principles of social and cultural
ANT 527 and DPA 527.
anthropology; historical background, structure
Prerequisite: Graduate standing or permission
and function, social processes, transactions,
culture, communication, continuity, and other of instructor
change; topics and problems of contemporary Summer, even years, 3-9 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
interest. Some ethnographic monographs are
discussed in terms of their relevance to the
ANT 536: Advanced Biostatistics and
general concepts and principles treated in the
Phylogenetic Comparative Methods
seminar. This course is offered as both ANT
The course will give an overview of
520 and DPA 520.
fundamental biostatistical approaches in R.
Fall, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
The first 6 courses give students in-depth
knowledge about developing quantitative
ANT 525: Research Areas in
research designs using standard parametric,
Anthropological Sciences
non-parametric and data reduction analyses in
An overview of the current research areas of
R. The next 8 courses introduce phylogenetic
the Anthropological Sciences as represented
comparative analyses, including approached
in the Master's Program of the Department
to account for phylogenetic relatedness in
of Anthropology. All first-year students are
standard parametric tests and ways to infer
expected to participate. Semesters offered: Fall the evolutionary history of traits using rate
0-2 credits, S/U grading
analysis. Students are expected to become
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
proficient in R programming. The course will
involve substantial preparation and included 10
ANT 526: The Use of Remote Sensing
take-home assignments.
and GIS in Environmental Analysis
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

16

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
May be repeated for credit.
ANT 550: Theory and Methodology in
Primatology
Comprehensive overview of the theory and
methodology used in the study of primate
behavioral ecology. Includes ecological field
methods, behavioral observations, analytical
techniques, nonparametric statistics as well as
planning, presenting, and reviewing research.
Offered as both ANT 550 and DPA 550.
Fall, even years, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
ANT 559: Archaeology of Food
Explores the archaeological study of food
and foodways. The emphasis is on the social
aspects of food, particularly its roles in
past power structures, social relationships,
conceptions of identity, ritual practices, and
gender roles. Also covers the theoretical and
methodological approaches archaeologists use
to study food in the past.
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
ANT 560: Ancient Mesopotamia
An examination of the cultural history of
Mesopotamia based on the archaeological,
textual and art historical record. Focusing
on the fourth through second millennia,
this course investigates both the long term
developmental process of this civilization,
and ways to understand its settlement
systems, urban structure, social and political
organization, economic structure and the role
played by religion.
Fall, alternate years, 4 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
ANT 561: Peasant Societies and
Cultures
The concept of peasantry is examined from
political, religious, and social class viewpoints
as well as from the more traditional economic
view. These agricultural peoples, who are
essentially preliterate and preindustrial, are
described and analyzed especially in relation
to the national societies of which they form a
part. This course is offered as both ANT 561
and DPA 561.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ANT 562: Long Island Archaeology
Life on Long Island and the surrounding
area from its first settlement by Native
Americans 12,000 years ago until the end of
the nineteenth century. Trends and changes in
human behavior are studied in the context of

Spring 2021
environmental and cultural processes affecting
all of northeastern North America.

and to those in other disciplines who make
inferences about past ways of life.

Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

Spring, 3-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

ANT 564: Primate Evolution
The taxonomic relationships and evolutionary
history of primates as documented by their
fossil record and structural and chemical
evidence. Emphasis on primates prior to the
origin of the human lineage. This course is
offered as ANT 564, DPA 564 and HBA 564.

ANT 573: Archaeology of Human
Dispersals
A survey of the archaeological evidence for
the dispersal of Homo sapiens during the Late
Pleistocene epoch (128,000-130,000 years
ago). Topics include African origin of Homo
sapiens, dispersals into Eurasia, Australia,
Spring, even years, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, and the Americas, large mammal extinctions,
origins of art, music, and symbolic behavior,
A-, B+, etc.)
emergence of hunter-gatherers.
ANT 565: Human Evolution
Offered
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
A survey of the fossil record of hominid
evolution through the Pliocene and Pleistocene
with emphasis on the morphological structure ANT 582: Comparative Anatomy of
Primates
and function of locomotor, masticatory,
and neural systems. Includes utilization of
The comparative anatomy of living primates.
comparative anatomical material and an
Laboratory work including evaluation of
extensive cast collection. This course is offered skeletal material and dissection (when
as ANT 565, DPA 565 and HBA 565.
possible) with emphasis on relating structural
diversity to behavior and biomechanics. This
Fall, even years, 4 credits, Letter graded (A,
course is offered as both ANT 582 and DPA
A-, B+, etc.)
582.
ANT 567: Primate Behavior and
4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Ecology
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
A comparative approach to the behavior
ANT 583: Human Demography
and ecology of living lemurs, monkeys, and
apes. Emphasis is placed on sociobiological
The study of human demography has had
theory; life history strategies; morphological
a long standing focus in anthropology,
adaptations; comparisons of primate
archaeology, economics and sociology for
communities in Asia, Africa, Madagascar, and the simple reason that the distribution and
South America; and primate conservation. This density of people fundamentally shapes
course is offered as both ANT 567 and DPA
many other aspects of the human condition.
567.
Human Demography gives students an
Fall, odd years, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, overview of population dynamics both as
they change through time and differ across
B+, etc.)
cultures. The course starts with outlining the
history of population studies. Following this
ANT 568: Hunters and Gatherers
The course focuses on the relationship between introduction, the three major components
of population change - fertility, mortality
ecology and adaptation to explore the crossand migration - are explored in depth. We
cultural diversity of hunter/gatherers. The
then survey the seminal transitions in human
first part of the course looks at a number of
key theoretic issues and debates that surround demographic history from hunting and
gathering to domestication and through
the study of hunter/gatherers. Once this
foundation is laid, students learn about modern modern postindustrial times. Drawing from the
ethnographic, human ecology, demographic
and historic hunter-gatherers from all the
and archaeological literature, students read and
major geographic regions of the world. This
discuss human demography from a variety of
overview draws on studies from behavioral
perspectives. The course includes some simple
ecology, ethnoarchaeology and cultural
computations and a lab.
anthropology. The focus of the course is
both to explore hunter/gatherer variation
in relationship to their environment, and to
give students an appreciation of the ways in
which hunter-gatherers have been historically
documented. The course is designed to be
applicable to archaeologists, anthropologists

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Spring, 3-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ANT 585: Prehistoric Peoples of the
Americas
ANT 585 Prehistoric Peoples of the Americas

17

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Life in the Americas from the first settlement
at the end of the Ice Age until the arrival
of the Europeans in the 15th and 16th
centuries. The culture, history, and evolution
of prehistoric peoples of North, Central,
and South America are treated. Specific
topics covered include settlement by North
Americans, hunting-gathering lifeways, plant
and animal domestication, the origins of
village life, and state-level societies.
Spring, odd years, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
ANT 591: Professional Skills in the
Anthropological Sciences, I.
An overview of the skills necessary for
scientific professionalism, with special
reference to successful performance in the
Anthropological Sciences. Topics covered
in this course include: use of basic software
tools, research design, data collection and
management, dissertation proposal and journal
article writing, oral and poster presentations,
and professional conduct. This course is not
an alternative to GRD 500. Recommended for
students of G0 through G4 status. Permission
by Instructor
0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ANT 592: Professional Skills in the
Anthropological Sciences, II.
A development of additional professional skills
necessary to master research and teaching
in the Anthropological Sciences including
career options and employment. Topics in
this course include: the dissertation writing
process, review processes, job applications
and negotiations, tenure process, and teaching
strategies. Recommended for students of G5
status. Permission by Instructor
0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ANT 593: Ethics in the Anthropological
Sciences
This course familiarizes students with the
major issues in the ethics of anthropological
science, research and teaching. Students
discuss scientific and academic values
and how best to comply with them in
academic, field, and laboratory environments.
Overarching research ethics topics addressed
include data management, scientific
misconduct, plagiarism, authorship, and
mentoring. This portion of the course
incorporates videos and readings from GRD
500. Anthropology-specific topics include
fieldwork, museum work, animal research, US
and international laws (biodiversity; cultural
& natural heritage), and public anthropology.
Anthropological Sciences faculty with

Spring 2021
particular expertise in these various areas lead
these discussions.

May be repeated for credit.

0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

ARH

ANT 599: M.A. Thesis Research
Fall, 0-6 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ANT 602: Research Seminar in
Anthropological Theory
This course is offered as both ANT 602 and
DPA 602.
Fall and Spring, 0-12 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ANT 610: Individual Research
Research supervised by faculty. Students must
have permission of instructor and enroll in
appropriate section. This course is offered as
both ANT 610 and DPA 610.
Fall and Spring, 1-12 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ANT 620: Research Seminar in Topical
Problems
This course is offered as both ANT 620 and
DPA 620.
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ANT 630: Research Seminar in
Physical Anthropology
This course is offered as both ANT 630 and
DPA 630.
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ANT 640: Research Seminar in
Ethnography and Ethnology
This course is offered as both ANT 640 and
DPA 640.
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ANT 650: Research Seminar in
Archaeology

Art History
ARH 501: Criticism, Theory, Practice:
From Artes Mechanicae to Artes
Liberales
An introduction to the history of art criticism
and theory from Greek and Roman antiquity
through the High Renaissance. The writings of
artists, historians, theologians, philosophers,
and theorists will be considered not as abstract
and independent concepts but in relation to
artistic practice. Changing aesthetic values,
whether expressed verbally, or in patronage
acts, will be explored. Attention will be
given to such theoretical concerns as the
paragone, the disegno-colorito debate, the
nature of artistic creation, and aesthetic values
reflected in basic principles regarding form,
color, composition, etc. In addition, we shall
investigate the particular strategies, if any,
employed by artists over the centuries to
elevate their social, economic and intellectual
status, in short, to promote the shift from
simple craftsman to divine genius.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ARH 502: Methods & Interpretation in
Early Modernist Art Criticism & Theory
A survey of European art criticism, theory,
methodologies, and interpretation from 1750
to 1890, stressing relationships between
art and the history of ideas. Study of visual
materials will rely heavily on close readings
of primary sources assigned weekly. The
principal goal of the course is to familiarize
students with the most important writings
on art from the period as a foundation for
the study of modern art. Secondary goals,
pertinent to the study of art history any period,
are to acquire analytic skills in interpreting
source material by explicating such writings
closely, to place them in context with each
other (intertextuality) and the
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

ANT 680: Special Seminar
Selected topics in cultural and social
anthropology. Topics reflect current interests
of faculty and graduate students. This course is
offered as both ANT 680 and DPA 680.
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ANT 800: Summer Research
This course is offered as both ANT 800 and
DPA 800.
S/U grading

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

ARH 503: History of 20th-Century Art
Criticism and Theory
The literature of art has expanded enormously
in the 20th century-far beyond attempts to
organize it developmentally or conceptually.
An attempt is made to define types of criticism
both in relation to the critics and their relation
to the support system for the arts of which they
are part.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
18

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
ARH 540: Methodologies of Art History
This graduate seminar is designed to engage
students with the history and methods of
the discipline of art history. Through close
readings and focused discussions, the course
examines issues raised by aesthetics, the
problems of biography and 'periodization',
and the role of canon formation. Particular
focus is directed towards the interpretive
tools that have developed from within the
discipline of art. In addition, also stressed
is the interdisciplinary nature of art history
through readings that discuss how lines
of thought and critical inquiry emerging
within other disciplines have had enormous
influence on art history and criticism in the
last two decades: semiotics, feminist theory,
psychoanalysis, anthropology and post colonial
theory, cultural studies, theories of mass
culture and the post-modern, and the current
debates about visual culture.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ARH 541: Topics in Ancient Art
This course deals with a variety of topics
relating to ancient art and its influence
on later European art and artistic theory.
Areas explored include ancient art history,
aesthetics, and comparative criticism; Roman
uses of Greek art; pagan imagery in early
Christian and medieval art; antique art
and the Renaissance (use of prototypes);
collecting antiquities (from the Medici
to Getty); archaeological exploration and
publication in the 18th and 19th centuries;
French neoclassicism; and the calligraphy
of Greek vases (Hamilton, Blake, Flaxman,
Ingres, Picasso).
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ARH 542: Topics in Medieval Art
A topic in medieval art or architecture, such
as early medieval manuscript illumination,
ornament and design, or the Gothic cathedral,
is selected and explored during the semester
in lectures, discussions, and student reports or
papers.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ARH 543: Topics in Renaissance Art
This course, usually a seminar, deals with
one or several of the following aspects of
Renaissance art: iconographic problems, style
and connoisseurship (including the study of
individual works at the Metropolitan Museum
or the Frick), patronage and its effect on the
form and content of a work, the exchange of

Spring 2021
artistic ideas between northern and southern
Europe, and Renaissance sources in antiquity
and the Middle Ages.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ARH 544: Topics in Early Modern Art
This seminar examines methodological
developments and historical issues related to
the art and visual culture of the early modern
period. Though we are concerned with objects,
discourses, and practices emerging in the
seventeenth century, we also approach these
through the perspective of contemporary
critical tools (for example, theories of
urban space, spectacle, and representation;
psychoanalysis, sexuality and subjectivity;
coloniality and the encounter with New world
otherness; semiotics and the construction of
absolutist power). Students are encouraged to
engage with these issues through the study of
traditional high art objects as well as through
other forms of representation emerging in the
early modern period-for example, scientific
illustration, more ephemeral forms of print
culture, and even urban and courtly spectacle.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ARH 545: Topics in 19th-Century Art
Selected topics in 19th-century art with an
emphasis on
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ARH 546: Topics in 20th-Century Art
Twentieth-century art considered as an
international movement, European and
American, although national groups may
be studied. Emphasis varies with topics
ranging over stylistic analysis, iconographical
interpretations, and theoretical studies.
Students are expected to undertake original
research and interpretation.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ARH 547: Topics in Global, Colonial,
and Diasporic Art
This course examines various issues in the
appreciation, interpretation and appropriation
of non-Western art. Emphasis is on developing
a critical approach to these arts and the manner
in which they have been represented and
misrepresented in the Western imagination.
Topics vary, but may include exploration
of themes in the so-called traditional arts of
Africa, Oceania, Native and Latin America,

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

the transformations of these arts during the
colonial period, issues of identity and the
consequences of dislocation versus sense
of place in the diaspora, and contemporary
expressions of non-Western artists on the
global scene.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ARH 548: Museum Studies
Through a combination of field trips, visiting
lecturers, group discussion, and student
projects, the course surveys the diverse aspects
of the museum field, including management,
curatorship, exhibitions, public relations,
conservation, and other areas of administration
and professional practice.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ARH 549: Topics in American Visual
Culture
This course examines selected issues in the
history of American art and material culture.
The course focuses upon, but is not necessarily
limited to, the United States. Topics include
public art and public culture; approaches
to the study of material culture; art and
commercial and/or popular culture; art and
regional locations; realism; imaging the West;
cross-cultural exchanges in art of the United
States. (May be used to fulfill 20th-century
requirement when material deals with 20thcentury art.)
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ARH 550: Inquiries into Art Criticism
and Theory
This course deals with the theoretical
approaches to the study of art that cross
historical boundaries. Topics vary from
semester to semester. They may be an
expansion of one of the areas generally
covered in ARH 540, such as psychology of
art or the iconography of architecture. Other
investigations may focus on subjects requiring
a special methodological approach, such as the
theory and history of ornament and design or
the role of public art.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ARH 551: Topics in Performance
The histories and theories of performance
are explored. Topics may be the performing
body, performance and political action, avantgarde performance, performing and artifact,
virtual performance, performance and identity.
19

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Depending on the topic, there may be a
performance and/or computer based projects.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ARH 551: Theories of Performance
This course examines different theories of
performance as they relate to theatre and
everyday life. Students explore ways of
thinking about the performing body and
different modes of cultural expression. There
is a performing component to the course in
addition to a final paper.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
ARH 552: Topics in Contemporary Art
The course will examine the latest
developments in visual art and architecture,
beginning with the Neo-Expressionism
and Neo-Conceptualism of the 1980s
and extending to installation and video
art. Postmodernist and activist art will
be examined in particular detail, and
contextualized in terms of the broader patterns
of 20th century art.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ARH 553: Contemporary Art in New
York
A systematic survey of contemporary art
on view in museums and galleries in New
York. The class would alternate between
gallery/museum visits and interpretative
analyses of the work in the classroom. A
variety of theoretical approaches will be used
and the full range of contemporary pluralism
will be examined. Contemporary art will
be understood as both a manifestation of
contemporary society and in terms of its larger
art historical context and significance. The
New York art scene is the richest in the world.
The class offers the student the opportunity for
direct, informed contact with it.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ARH 554: Topics in Visual Culture
This class examines issues in the
interdisciplinary field of visual culture. Visual
culture studies look at the dynamic state of
visual media in contemporary life and their
historical origins, seeking to relate art and film
to the mass media and digital culture.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ARH 570: Issues in Architectural
History and Criticism
This course examines a series of topics that
link architecture with other critical disciplines.

Spring 2021
Among the topics that may be addressed
are architectural theory and the theories of
language; the history of proportion and the
construction of gender; and Orientalism.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ARH 580: Art Criticism or Gallery
Internship
An internship offering practical experience
in some aspect of the field of art history and
criticism, such as gallery and curatorial work
in an on-campus or off-campus gallery or
museum, or journalistic experience with an
art or criticism publication such as the Art
department journal Art Criticism.
Prerequisite: Good standing in the graduate
art history and criticism program
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.

Instruction in the department by advanced
graduate students under the supervision of
faculty.
3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
ARH 690: Directed Readings for
Doctoral Candidates
An independent reading course to be arranged
with a particular faculty member. Normally,
this course is reserved for advanced PhD.
students who have fulfilled most of their
course requirements and for whom the
proposed program of study cannot be
completed within other existing course
structures.
Fall and Spring, 1-9 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

ARH 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
ARH 591: Practicum in the Writing of
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
Art Criticism
(G5). Major portion of research must take
This course is designed as a practicum in the
place on SBU campus, at Cold Spring Harbor,
writing of art criticism under the supervision of or at the Brookhaven National Lab.
the faculty.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.

grading
May be repeated for credit.

ARH 592: Practicum in Teaching
Instruction in the department under the
supervision of the faculty. (This course may
not be included more than once in the courses
taken in fulfillment of the 36 credit hour
requirement.)

ARH 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.

Fall and Spring, 3 credits, S/U grading
ARH 595: Directed Readings in Art
History, Criticism, and Theory
An independent reading course to be arranged
with a particular faculty member. Normally,
this course is reserved for second year
Masters Students who have fulfilled most
of their course requirements and for whom
the proposed program of study cannot be
completed within other existing course
structures.
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ARH 598: Thesis
Prerequisite: Completion of all degree
requirements
Fall, Spring and
Summer, 1-6 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ARH 602: Teaching Practicum,
Advanced

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ARH 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
in MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver be second week of classes. The

20

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.

known artist's studio, or related facility or
institution.

All international students must received
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

Prerequisite: Accepted candidate for M.F.A.
Summer, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.

ARH 800: Summer Research
May be repeated for credit.

ARS
Art, Studio
ARS 520: Special Projects for M.F.A.
Candidates
Advanced projects in areas that may not be
included in the M.F.A. curriculum, utilizing
the unique talents of regular and visiting
faculty, the facilities of the Art department, or
other aspects of the university environment,
and possibly facilities at other locations or
institutions. This course has an associated fee.
Please see www.stonybrook.edu/coursefees
for more information. Prerequisites: Faculty
sponsor, permission of graduate studies
director.
Fall, Spring and
Summer, 1-9 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

ARS 531: Graduate Teaching
Practicum
Supervised teaching practicum in
undergraduate studio or studio, theory course.
Prerequisite: Accepted candidate for M.F.A.
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
ARS 532: Thesis Project
Preparation of thesis under the program
advisor.
Prerequisites: Accepted candidate for M.F.A.,
review board passed
Summer, 1-6 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ARS 535: Projects in Studio Art
Projects in studio art, field and media to be
determined on a per semester basis by the
individual instructor.
1-6 credits,
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.

ARS 540: Graduate Photo Studio
Photographic studio, theory, and laboratory
emphasizing individual development as a
photographer. Color and black-and-white
ARS 525: Electronic Media
studios and darkrooms. Fine arts, reportage,
An exploration of the experimental artistic
illustration, commercial, and industrial. This
practices utilizing computer and electronic
course has an associated fee. Please see
technologies: digital imaging, video and
www.stonybrook.edu/coursefees for more
audio, web and CD-Rom production, and
interactive installation. It will provide practical information. Prerequisites: Demonstration of
appropriate level of proficiency, permission of
instruction in the use of computer media with
instructor.
an orientation towards relating this to the
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
graduate student's own practice. It will also
A-, B+, etc.)
analyze the unique possibilities of this hybrid
May be repeated for credit.
and developing art form through theoretical
readings and examination of recent works,
exhibitions, festivals, and the worldwide web. ARS 550: In Process Critique
Graduate theory and practice of art,
This course has an associated fee. Please see
investigating historical and contemporary
www.stonybrook.edu/coursefees for more
concepts, concentrating on individual
information.
development as an artist. Conceptual,
Prerequisite: Accepted candidate for M.F.A.
environmental and wide ranging solutions are
or permission of department
encouraged. Required for first year MFA's,
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
this course culminates in a body of work for
A-, B+, etc.)
the end of the year First Year Exhibition. The
May be repeated for credit.
course also provides students with vigorous
critical feedback throughout this process,
ARS 530: Professional Experience
augmenting it with readings and discussions of
Internship
Internship in the professional art world of New related New York City exhibitions in galleries
and museums to inform the development of
York City and its environs. Depending on the
their work.
career objectives of the M.F.A. candidate, the
student may choose to intern at a foundry,
printmaking atelier, art gallery or museum,

Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

May be repeated for credit.
ARS 551: Graduate Painting Studio
Studio and theory in painting and related visual
forms, with instruction and facilities available
in all media and techniques; emphasis on
individual development as an artist. Models
and space for environmental and conceptual
works available. This course has an associated
fee. Please see www.stonybrook.edu/
coursefees for more information.
Prerequisites: Permission of instructor;
accepted candidate for M.F.A. or permission
of department
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ARS 560: Graduate Sculpture Studio
Theory and practice of sculpture for the
graduate student, with instruction and
facilities available in all media and techniques;
emphasis on individual development as an
artist. Studio facilities include air, electric, and
hydraulic power equipment; TIG, MIG, Arc,
and flame welding; forging; woodworking;
modeling, molding, and casting facilities for
clay, wax, plaster, and plastics; and metal
casting capabilities in investment, shell, sand,
and centrifugal. This course has an associated
fee. Please see www.stonybrook.edu/
coursefees for more information.
Prerequisites: Permission of instructor;
accepted candidate for M.F.A. or permission
of department
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ARS 561: Graduate Ceramics and/ or
Ceramic Sculpture Studio
Theory and practice of ceramics and ceramic
sculpture for the graduate student with
emphasis on individual development as
an artist. Advanced studio instruction in
handbuilding: coil, slab, pinch; wheelthrowing;
casting, inclusive of multipiece plaster pourmolds; various firing techniques: reduction,
oxidation, raku, and high- and low-fire glaze
techniques. This course has an associated fee.
Please see www.stonybrook.edu/coursefees for
more information.
Prerequisites: Permission of instructor;
accepted candidate for M.F.A. or permission
of department
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ARS 570: Graduate Printmaking Studio
Graduate studio in the theory and practice
of printmaking. Color, black-and-white,
21

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
and photographic processes in plate and
stone lithography, serigraphy, relief, and
intaglio, emphasizing the student's individual
development as an artist.
Prerequisites: Permission of instructor;
accepted candidate for M.F.A. or permission
of department
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ARS 580: Visual Arts Seminar
Required seminar and critique throughout the
M.F.A. curriculum. Guest speakers, artists, and
critics; demonstrations and lectures; seminars;
individual and group critiques. The M.F.A.
candidate, as part of this seminar, regularly
participates in critiques in which his or her
work is analyzed by guest faculty and art
history/criticism faculty and graduate students,
as well as by his or her peers. The visual arts
seminar, where applicable, includes field trips
and assignments of special lectures, panels,
seminars, and other events of the professional
art world.
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ARS 800: Summer Research

BCB
Biochemistry and Cell Biology
BCB 551: Introduction to Research in
Biochemistry and Cell Biology
A series of talks, discussions, and practical
exercises to address topics related to research
in biochemistry and cell biology including
laboratory etiquette, the laboratory notebook,
experimental design, critical evaluation of
the literature, analysis and presentation of
data, ethical issues, and basic experimental
techniques used in biochemistry and cell
biology.

Spring 2021
lectures and demonstrations. Various topics
will be covered such as protein purification
and characterization using spectroscropic
and thermodynamic techniques as well as
gel electrophoresis and immunoblotting;
identification of metabolites by mass
spectrometry; bioinformatics analysis of
DNA deep sequencing data; electron and
fluorescence microscopy and the use of
zebrafish and nematodes to understand
biological processes.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BCB 559: MS Research Practicum in
Biochemistry and Cell Biology
The student will be introduced to modern
biochemical and cell biological research
techniques through participation in ongoing
research in the laboratory of a Biochemistry
and Cell Biology or associated faculty
member for one semester. Student must obtain
permission to register from the sponsoring
faculty member.
Prerequisite: Matriculation in MS program or
permission of instructor
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 0-4 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.
BCB 599: MS Thesis Research in
Biochemistry and Cell Biology
Thesis research will be conducted in the
laboratory of a Biochemistry and Cell Biology
or associated faculty member, including
potentially an internship under the guidance
of an approved mentor in the laboratory of a
local biotechnology company. Student must
identify and obtain permission to register from
the sponsoring faculty member. Prerequisite:
Matriculation in MS program or permission of
instructor Offered
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 3-6 credits, S/U
grading

BDA

Prerequisites: Matriculation in MS program or Decision Analytics
permission of instructor
BDA 508: Advanced Analytics
Fall, 2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
This course introduces students to challenging
business problems in distribution, routing and
BCB 552: Advanced Laboratory
scheduling, and to the solutions strategies for
Methods in Biochemistry and Cell
such problem via discrete optimization. The
Biology
topics include integer programming techniques
This course introduces theoretical principles
such as cutting plane and branch and bound,
and experimental techniques used to
special purpose algorithms for distribution and
investigate the properties of biological
network problems, and heuristic optimization
molecules and their interactions. Students
techniques for combinatorial optimization,
will familiarize themselves with the
such as Simulated Annealing, Tabu Search,
instrumentation and techniques used to
Evolutionary Algorithms, Ant Colony
investigate different biochemical and cell
biological problems through a combination of Optimization.
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BDA 510: Advanced Data Analysis and
Decision Making
By successfully completing this course, the
student will have an understanding of the ways
in which advanced statistical methods are
used to address significant decision-making
problems as they arise in the business setting.
Specifically, the student will understand the
various ways in which decision problems can
be formulated and solved and how to deal with
violations of the assumptions commonly found
in standard methods. The student will have a
greater understanding of multivariate models
and ways to build them, and how to handle
data collected over time in looking for trends
and in making predictions.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BDA 513: Decision Analysis under
Uncertainty
This is a hands-on course on computer
simulation and other probabilistic modeling
approaches to analyze and improve business,
service, and manufacturing systems that
are subject to risk. The course takes the
perspective of the consultant whose job is
to analyze managerial decision based on
imperfect observations and unknown outcomes
to understand the behavior of the system and
explore the effects of alternative decisions.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

BEE
Ecology and Evolution
BEE 500: Directed Readings in
Population Biology
Directed readings in topics of current interest,
under supervision of a faculty sponsor,
culminating in one or more critical review
papers.
Prerequisites: Sponsor and approval of
master's program executive committee
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
BEE 501: Directed Readings in the
Biology of Organisms
Directed readings in topics of current interest,
under supervision of a faculty sponsor,
culminating in one or more critical review
papers.
Prerequisite: Sponsor and approval of
master's program executive committee
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

22

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
BEE 510: Biology Education Research:
Teaching, Learning, and Assessment
Introduction to core policy documents,
standards, concepts, and empirical methods
in biology education research and their
applications to undergraduate classroom
settings. Appropriate for graduate students in
the biological sciences and/or those enrolled in
the Ph.D. Program in Science Education.

Spring 2021
BEE 552: Biometry
An intensive course in statistical theory and
methodology. The analysis of real biological
data is emphasized. Topics include analysis
of variance, simple multiple and curvilinear
regression analysis, correlation analysis, and
goodness of fit tests.
Spring, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

BEE 559: Individual Studies in
Organisms
A detailed study of the biology of a selected
systematic group chosen by the graduate
student and a faculty member. This is
conducted as a tutorial course.
Fall and Spring, 1-4 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BEE 520: Advanced Human Genetics
An advanced course in human genetics. Topics
include the genotype/phenotype association,
genetic architecture of disease/phenotype,
human population genetics, coalescent theory,
methylation, and ancient DNA. The course
will emphasize hands-on engagement with
genetic data and critical reading of scientific
papers. Computer laboratory analysis/
assignments will make up a major component
of this class. Students will be evaluated based
on computer assignments and a final individual
research project.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
BEE 521: Genomics Lab
This course provides a computer lab-based
introduction to comparative genomics,
molecular evolutionary analysis, and next
generation sequencing (NGS) data and
analysis. Activities will include familiarization
with both web-based and command-line tools
for analyzing genomic data and summarizing/
visualizing results. Lectures and background
reading will provide an introduction to basic
principles of genomics to inform computerbased hands-on activities. A weekly recitation
will promote discussion. Students will be
evaluated based on computer lab assignments,
as well as a final individual project that applies
learned concepts and approaches to a novel
research question.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
BEE 550: Principles of Ecology
Population dynamics, interactions of
organisms, theoretical concepts of community
structure and their biological and evolutionary
implications.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BEE 551: Principles of Evolution
Biological evolution, including the genetics
of populations, speciation, evolution of higher
taxa, and the fossil record.
Fall, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

BEE 553: Multivariate Analysis in
Biology
An introduction to multivariate statistical
analysis for biologists. Topics include general
least squares analysis, MANOVA, cluster
analysis, and factor analysis.
Prerequisite: BEE 552 or equivalent
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BEE 554: Population Genetics and
Evolution
A general introduction to mathematical
population genetics and evolutionary theory.
The effects of mutation, recombination,
selection, and migration are studied. Modern
concepts in both theoretical and experimental
population genetics are covered.
Prerequisite: BEE 552 or equivalent, and a
course in evolution
Spring, odd years, 0-3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
BEE 555: Mathematical Methods in
Population Biology
This course covers a variety of mathematical
methods used in modern theoretical biology.
Topics include linear algebra and applications,
ordinary and partial differential equations,
and stochastic processes. Examples from
population biology, i.e., mathematical ecology
and population genetics, are used throughout.
Fall, even years, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
BEE 556: Research Areas of Ecology
and Evolution
A description of the current research areas of
ecology and evolution, broadly conceived. All
first-year ecology and evolution students are
expected to participate.
Fall and Spring, 1-2 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
BEE 558: Tutorial Readings
Individual tutorial study with an instructor
in the Graduate Program in Ecology and
Evolution for the purpose of background
reading in an area of ecology and evolution.
Fall and Spring, 1-4 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

BEE 560: Advanced Ecology
This course will provide students with an
understanding of the theoretical basis and
empirical tests of diverse advanced topics in
the field of ecology. The format includes both
lectures and student-led discussions of primary
literature.
2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
BEE 562: Concepts and Methods in
Evolutionary Biology
The course aims at achieving two related
objectives: first, to provide graduate students
in Ecology & Evolution, other biology
departments, as well as Philosophy, with a
basic understanding of the varied methods
(both experimental and statistical) that make
up the body of evolutionary quantitative
biology. The focus will be in particular on
quantitative genetics and its interface with
more modern approaches, including QTL
mapping, bioinformatics and the various
"omics" (genomics, proteomics, etc.).
Second, students will become familiar with
the fundamental concepts of philosophy
of science, in particular as they relate to
the conceptual analysis of the ideas that
shape modern evolutionary and ecological
theory. In this respect, the focus will be
both on philosophical concepts such as
falsificationism, induction, deduction,
hypothesis testing and the nature of evidence,
as well as on the meaning of key ideas in
evolutionary ecology, like natural selection,
genetic drift, and constraints.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BEE 564: Geometric Morphometrics
An introduction to theory and methods used
in geometric morphometrics. Image analysis,
outline methods, landmark methods, and shape
statistics are covered.
Prerequisite: BEE 552 or equivalent; BEE 553
recommended
Fall, even years, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
BEE 566: Horizons in Ecology and
Evolution

23

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
The course is designed to provide beginning
graduate students in Ecology and Evolution
with an extended perspective on current and
developing trends in this field. It will be based
on readings (empirical and review papers) and
discussion on diverse topics. The hour-long
class will meet on a weekly basis. Each class
session will be led by the faculty member with
expertise in the scheduled topic of study.
Offered:
Spring, 1 credit, S/U grading
BEE 567: Molecular Diversity
Laboratory
This course will provide hands-on experience
in established and recently developed methods
of detecting and analyzing molecular variation
(DNA, RNA, Proteins) in nature. Natural
populations of Drosophila melanogaster will
be the model material for this laboratory. The
main theme of this course is that molecular
variation is abundant in nature and is an
important tool for understanding adaptive
evolution and species relationships.
Prerequisite: permission of instructor
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BEE 569: Bayesian Data Analysis and
Computation
An applied course in Bayesian analysis
and hierarchical modeling for advanced
graduate students in Ecology & Evolution
or related sciences. Topics will include
probability theory, Bayesian analysis, and
MCMC methods such as Gibbs, sampling
and Metropolis-Hastings sampling, as well as
applied issues regarding the choice of prior
distributions, posterior convergence, censored
and missing data, and model checking and
comparison. The course will be taught
using WinBUGS and JAGS as accessed via
the R packages R2WinBUGS and R2jags,
respectively. Offered in the Fall.
4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BEE 571: Ecology Laboratory
This course stresses the collection, analysis,
and interpretation of ecological data, mostly
in terrestrial settings. Laboratory and field
exercises demonstrate the operation of general
ecological principles in specific populations
and communities.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BEE 572: Conservation Biology
Society and individual lives are increasingly
affected by environmental degradation at
different scales. From the decline of local
fisheries to global climate change, multiple
crises threaten the biodiversity and ecosystems
that sustain us humans. This course introduces

Spring 2021
the scientific foundations of conservation
biology, along with examples from realworld conservation. The course reviews the
biological concepts that underlie conservation
including habitat requirements, population
dynamics, biogeography, and population
genetics. Analysis of case studies on the
effects of human activities on biological
diversity and ecosystem services will be used
to explore the interdisciplinary nature of the
practice of conservation. This course will
prepare students for careers in environmental
sciences and ecology.
Offered in Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
BEE 574: Landscape Ecology
Laboratory
A computer lab course focusing on spatial
concepts, methods, and tools for addressing
environmental problems. The course will be
based on fundamental concepts in ecology
and environmental science and extend that
knowledge, as well as teaching technical
skills, including the use of geographic
information systems (GIS) software, image
processing, spatially explicit modeling,
and spatial statistics. The lab exercises will
introduce a variety of spatial approaches
for addressing problems in environmental
protection, ecotoxicology, natural resource
management, conservation biology and
wildlife management.
Offered
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BEE 575: Evolutionary Ecology
The approach is to understand the theoretical
basis and review empirical tests of diverse
topics. The format includes both lectures and
student-led discussions of primary literature.
Prerequisite: BEE 550; BEE 551, or
permission of instructor
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
BEE 576: Principles and Applications
of Ecology and Evolution
An overview of the principles of ecology and
evolutionary biology, and the applications
of these principles in conservation biology,
environmental and health sciences, and
resource management. The course will cover
fundamental concepts and research questions
in population, community, and ecosystem
ecology; population genetics; and evolutionary
ecology. These principles will be discussed
in the context of contemporary issues, such
as global climate change, biodiversity loss,
environmental contaminants, infectious
diseases, invasive species, and management of
ecological resources. Offered

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Fall, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BEE 577: Ecological Genetics
An introduction to the concepts, research
questions, and methods involved in modern
ecological genetics and genomics. The
course will provide a strong foundation and
broad conceptual framework for students
planning to engage in empirical work in
conservation, management, ecology, and
evolutionary biology. The course will cover
basic Mendelian genetics, meiosis, and mating
systems, standard population genetics methods
for describing variation within and between
populations, basic quantitative genetics,
methods for molecular marker genotyping,
bioinformatic and genomic concepts, and
organism-specific methods and case studies,
including plant and animal ecological genetics.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
BEE 585: Research Design and
Analysis in Ecology and Evolution
This course covers topics relevant to statistical
aspects of carrying out research in ecology
and evolution as well as interpreting the
results of one's own and others analyses,
particularly in field data and for experimental
data in the lab and field. The topics include
quantification of spatial pattern and spatial
heterogeneity, recognizing and accounting
for indirect effects and artifacts, design and
analysis of experiments, meta-analysis and
quantitative research synthesis. This course
will also provide an introduction to ecological
niche modeling and bioinformatics (focused
on species and traits). We will review a
synthetic set of tools useful for a broad range
of questions in ecology and evolution. Offered
Fall, odd years, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
BEE 586: Introduction to Ecological
Modeling
This course will provide students with a
familiarity of the major concepts, approaches,
and underlying rationale for modeling in
the ecological sciences. Topics will include
reviews of theoretical and empirical models,
the use of models in adaptive management,
and how to confront models with data to
evaluate alternative hypotheses. Roughly
1/3 of the course will be devoted to the
use of models in management, focusing on
the problems of fitting models to data and
management pitfalls that follow. Course work
will consist of readings, in class exercises,
and group assignments that involve the
construction, analysis, and interpretation of
ecological models.

24

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Prerequisite: BEE 550, BEE 552; MAT 131 or
equivalent; any statistics course.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
BEE 587: Applied Ecology and
Conservation Biology Laboratory
A computer laboratory course introducing
students to ecological risk analysis and
conservation biology. Laboratories are based
on interactive software. Computer simulation
techniques for addressing problems in applied
ecology are emphasized. This course is coscheduled with BEE 353 for Spring 2012.
Prerequisites: A year of calculus; one-year
undergraduate biology course for majors

Spring 2021
Seminars on selected topics concerning
ecological, genetical, and evolutionary
problems in the marine environment.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 0-2 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
BEE 690: Seminar on Evolutionary
Processes
Seminars on selected topics concerning
evolutionary processes.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 0-2 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

BEE 691: Seminar on Systematics and
Spring, even years, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, Phylogeny
A-, B+, etc.)
Seminars on selected topics in systematics.
Topics will include the theory of classification
BEE 588: Current Topics in Ecology
and numerical taxonomy, both phenetic and
and Evolution
cladistic.
Subject matter varies from semester to
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 0-2 credits,
semester, depending upon the interests of
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
students and staff.
May be repeated for credit.
Fall and Spring, 2 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
BEE 692: Seminar on the Environment
and Human Affairs
BEE 599: Research
Student seminars on selected topics concerned
Original investigation undertaken with the
with the effect of man on the environment.
supervision of a member of the staff.
Application of ecological and evolutionary
theory to the solution of human problems.
Fall and Spring, 1-12 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
Fall or Spring, 0-2 credits, Letter graded (A,
BEE 670: Informal Seminar
Presentation of preliminary research results
and current research problems by students and
faculty.
Fall and Spring, 0-2 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
BEE 671: Ecology and Evolution
Colloquium
A weekly series of research seminars presented
by visiting scientists as well as by the faculty.
Required every semester of all ecology and
evolution graduate students.
Fall, 0-2 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
BEE 672: Ecology and Evolution
Colloquium
A weekly series of research seminars presented
by visiting scientists as well as by the faculty.
Required every semester of all ecology and
evolution graduate students.
Spring, 0-2 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
BEE 689: Seminar on Adaptations of
Marine Organisms

A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
BEE 693: Seminar on Population and
Community Ecology
Student seminars on selected topics in
population and community ecology.
Fall or Spring, 0-2 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
BEE 695: Seminar on Ecological
Processes
Seminars on selected topics concerning
ecological processes at the individual,
population, community, ecosystem, and global
levels.
Offered
Fall and Spring, 0-2 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
BEE 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research must take
place on SBU campus, at Cold Spring Harbor,
or at the Brookhaven National Lab.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.
BEE 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
BEE 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
in MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.
All international students must received
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
BEE 800: Full-Time Summer Research
May be repeated for credit.

BGE
Genetics
BGE 501: Foundations of Science
Communication I
In this team-taught, immersive science
communication training, students will build
skills to passionately communicate in a
way that excites, engages, and encourages
audiences to want to learn more about
their work. Improvisational theater-based
techniques are combined with message design
strategies like distilling and storytelling,
enabling healthcare professionals, scientists,
and researchers to use strategy and spontaneity

25

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
to execute powerful communication in any
context.
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BGE 503: Foundations of Science
Communication II
In this immersive science communication
training, participants who have completed
JRN 501 will continue their foundations in
science communication with explorations into
engaging with key audiences and the media, as
well as creating a presentation accompanied by
compelling visuals.
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BGE 510: Graduate Genetics
This course investigates fundamental aspects
of the transmission and expression of genetic
information in prokaryotic and eukaryotic
systems. The course is organized in a way that
allows the students to appreciate the breadth
of genetics research, while also gaining an
in-depth understanding of selected important
topics. Students explore the use of both
classical and molecular genetic approaches to
understand biological processes in genetics
model systems including yeast, flies, worms,
mouse, and man.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
BGE 530: Laboratory Rotation
The student rotates through laboratories
of four different genetics program faculty
members during the first year. The selection
of the laboratories is made by the student, in
conjunction with individual faculty, and with
the approval of the program director. By taking
part in ongoing projects, the student will learn
experimental procedures and techniques and
become acquainted with research opportunities
in the participating programs. Prerequisite:
Permission of instructor
Fall and Spring, 1-8 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.

Spring 2021
Fall and Spring, 0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
BGE 534: Introduction to Systems
Biology
This course is geared towards teaching
essential concepts and computational skills in
Systems Biology. The course is centered upon
two key programming languages: Matlab for
modeling applications and the R language for
statistical analysis and sequence manipulation.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
BGE 550: Genetics Outside Seminar
Outside seminars and special topics courses in
areas relating to genetic studies.
1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
BGE 599: Graduate Research
Original investigation undertaken with the
supervision of a member of the program.
Fall and Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
BGE 657: Principles of Development
This course deals with developing systems
at all levels from the morphological to the
molecular. Illustrative material from both
animal and plant kingdoms is used. Special
attention is given to gametogenesis, genetic
control of early development, transcriptional
and translational control of protein synthesis,
the role of cell division and cell movements,
and cell-to-cell interactions in defining
developing systems.
Prerequisite: MCB 656, matriculation in
graduate program or permission of instructor.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BGE 691: Readings in Genetics
Journal Club on thematic topics in different
areas of current genetics research

Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall and Spring, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-,
BGE 531: Graduate Student Seminar in
B+, etc.)
Genetics
May be repeated for credit.
Students have the opportunity to present
their research to other students and faculty
BGE 693: Research Proposal
on an annual basis. Students in the first or
Preparation in Genetics
second year will present brief seminars as
A course, based upon literature in the broad
part of a one-day symposium with all of
field of Genetics, to instruct in scientific
their classmates. Advanced students present
writing and the preparation of research
research seminars as part of a weekly research proposals. In the first section of the course,
seminar series that is attended by faculty and
students will become familiar with the
students. Although the first and second year
components of a research proposal and will
students do not present in this weekly seminar read and evaluate proposals written by the
series, they should attend these seminars as it
training faculty. Discussions guided by the
provides an excellent mechanism for learning
course co-directors will cover the basics
about current areas of research interest.
of scientific writing, research proposal
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

preparation, and the problems and concerns
commonly voiced by reviewers of research
proposals. In the second section, students will
develop and write a research proposal for the
student of a topic in genetics that is unrelated
to their graduate research. The students¿ skills
in proposal preparation will be enhanced by
critiquing the draft proposals presented by
other students in the course
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BGE 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Prerequisite: Advancement to candidacy (G5).
Major portion of research must take place on
SBU campus.
1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
BGE 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. All international students
must enroll in one of the graduate student
insurance plans and should be advised by an
International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
BGE 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
in MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver by second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.
All international students must received
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
BGE 800: Summer Research
May be repeated for credit.

BIO
Biology
26

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
BIO 511: Topics in Biotechnology
An introduction to the field of biotechnology.
The course will survey the history of
the development of genetic engineering,
methodologies used in biotechnology,
applications of biotechnology in medicine,
agriculture and manufacturing, and the
implications of these technologies for
society. Intended for the students in the
MAT Science and MALS programs. This
course has an associated fee. Please see
www.stonybrook.edu/course fees for more
information. Offered

Spring 2021
BIO 542: Model Systems for the Living
Environment
Introduction to microbial model systems used
in biological research such as yeast, nematodes
and slime molds. Particular attention will be
given to using these systems in the classroom
to illustrate key concepts in introductory
biology. Students will read and discuss
research papers selected from the current
scientific literature. Topics to be covered
include: life cycle, laboratory techniques and
design of inquiry-based investigations.

term goal is to help apply their knowledge of
molecular and cellular phenomena and the
analytical techniques learned in this course
to design and development of products and
processed for improving help and/or medical
care. Therefore, a major component of this
course will be an individual project requiring
the development of a patent for a biomedical
device or process, which relies on one or more
of the biological (cell and molecular level) and
engineering principles covered in class.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Offered
Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

BME 502: Advanced Numerical &
Computation Analysis Applied to
Biological Systems
Numerical analyses of Biological Data. A
BIO 515: Current Topics in
BIO 558: Biological Basis of Human
unified mathematical/time series framework
Microbiology
Evolution and Behavior
A survey of microbiology with an emphasis on A exploration of biological theories of human for modeling and mining biological data.
Applications range from cardio-respiratory,
microbial ecology, the role of microbes in the
evolution, properties, and behavior. We build
renal blood pressure/flow and sequence
biosphere and the methodology used to explore an understanding of evolution of complex
these areas. The course is organized around
organisms by natural selection, followed by the (DNA,RNA, proteins) to gene expression
data. Tools of data analysis include linear
two resources available online: Unseen Life
emergence of humans as a uniquiely complex
algebra, interpolation and extrapolation,
on Earth: An Introduction to Microbiology,
species. Scientific hypothesis formation and
parametric and nonparametric spectral
which was produced by The American Society testing using the extensive multidisciplinary
estimation with the FFT and singular value
for Microbiology (http://www.learner.org/
empirical record of the 1.8 million years
decomposition, statistical description of
resources/series121.html) and the New
of human history is developed throughout.
data and integration of ordinary differential
York State core curriculum for The Living
Implications of human evolutionary biology
equations. Special focus will be placed on the
Environment (http://www.p12.nysed.gov/ciai/ for contemporary social and sexual behavior
use of linear and nonlinear numerical methods
mst/sci/ls.html) . Intended for the students
are also investigated.
for the identification of physiological system
in the MAT Science and MALS programs.
This course is co-scheduled with BIO 558.
dynamics and the development of computer
This course has an associated fee. Please see
Fall, Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B
simulation techniques to study dynamic
www.stonybrook.edu/course fees for more
+, etc.)
response of physiological systems. Cannot be
information.
May be repeated for credit.
repeated for credit.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
BIO 600: Practicum in Teaching
etc.)
BIO 520: Topics in Genetics
Fall and Spring, S/U grading
A survey of genetics organized around a
May be repeated for credit.
BME 503: Cell and Molecular Imaging
particular topic, including gene regulation,
This course will cover basics of optics,
developmental genetics, cancer genetics,
BIO 601: Practicum in Teaching
microscopy, spectroscopy and fluorescence
epigenetics with emphasis on areas with
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
in the context of imaging at the cellular
emerging new insight. The methodology used
May be repeated for credit.
and molecular level. Recently developed
to study these areas will also be explored.
advanced imaging techniques for probing
Intended for students in the MAT Biology and
protein interactions and live cell functions are
PhD Science Education programs.
also discussed. The course is organized in 3
Offered
modules:
Biomedical
Engineering
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BME 501: Engineering Principles in
BIO 521: Laboratory Science
BME 504: Biomaterials Science and
Cell Biology
Curriculum Development
Analysis
Course content is directed toward describing
Development of curriculum materials
Course content is directed toward providing
the physico-chemical and biological
appropriate for a secondary school biology
an introductory treatment of the engineering
interactions within cells, and between cells
classroom. Students may take this course in
issues implicit in understanding living
and their environment. The course has
their second semester of the Master of Arts in
tissue interactions with processed materials.
two main objectives: 1) to equip students
Teaching Science program.
Emphasis on identifying and eliminating
with
essential
knowledge
and
stimulate
Offered
surface contamination, corrosion, and
Fall and Spring, 1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, intuitive understanding of molecular and cell
biology; 2) to introduce and develop common optimizing material surface properties and
A-, B+, etc.)
compatibility.
engineering concepts and approaches for
May be repeated for credit.
quantitative analysis of physical-chemical
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
systems in context of cell biology. The longetc.)
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

BME

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

27

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
BME 505: Principles and Practice of
Biomedical Engineering
Introduces first year students to the basic
and clinical research at the cutting edge of
biomedical engineering. The course has
two key components: the first is a seminar
series presented by internationally renowned
bioengineers. An interactive discussion of
topic-specific scientific literature precedes the
formal presentation. The second component of
the course is teaming up with a physician, in
rounds, the operating theater, clinics, etc., to
get exposure to the real-life problems which
face the medical community. It is hoped
that the mix of science and clinic will move
students towards determining how they can
make contributions to health and society.
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BME 508: Molecular and Cellular
Biomechanics
Course content revolves around the effects
and interactions of mechanical forces at the
cellular and molecular level. The topics range
from describing the molecular and cellular
basis of the adaptation of tissues to physical
signals, to prescribing specific mechanical
environments for improved tissue engineering,
to delineating relevant molecular, cellular,
and biomechanical techniques, to issues
involved in the development and approval
of diagnostics and therapeutics in molecular
engineering. Course format is based on
lectures and discussion of the current literature.
For a deeper understanding of the scientific
literature, this course will contain a module on
the design and analysis of experiments (i.e.,
applied biostatistics).
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
BME 509: Fundamentals of the
Bioscience Industry
A 4-module course set up to provide students
with a comprehensive introduction to the
complexities of the bioscience business
environment.
Prerequisite: Must be either a BME or MBA
graduate student (West Campus). All other
students must obtain permission from the
instructor.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
BME 510: Biomechanics
This course emphasizes the application of
continuum mechanics to living tissues and
organs in order to describe the material
properties and their behavior under loading
and stress. The interrelationship between
biomechanics and physiology is examined in

Spring 2021
normal function and in disease processes. This
course focuses on the physiology of tissue and
organ systems in the context of mechanics,
stress, strain, viscoelasticity and material
behavior, and the constitutive equations and
the field equations governing fluids and fluid
flow, with an emphasis on the cardiovascular
and musculoskeletal systems. Emphasis
is placed on the utilization of engineering
principles to analyze processes at the tissue
and organ levels, covering soft and hard tissues
and organs (blood, cardiovascular system,
bone, cartilage, etc.) and to understand how
these principles could be applied towards the
design and development of prosthetic devices.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BME 511: Fundamentals of the
Bioscience Industry
This course will provide students with a
comprehensive introduction to the bioscience
business environment by examining the
commercialization process ¿ how an idea
becomes a product. This includes evolving
business models, product development
cycles, regulatory issues, finance, managerial
challenges and future trends in the life
sciences. Special focus will be placed on
preparing students to translate concepts
presented in the course into commercial
analysis of a technology. Must be either BME
or MBA Graduate Student (West Campus)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BME 512: Fundamentals of BioEntrepreneurship
This course will build on topics presented in
BME-511: Fundamentals of the Bioscience
Industry Program, and is a pre- or co-requisite
for enrollment. Students will work through
modules addressing each component of
the commercialization process including
intellectual property strategy, market analysis
and opportunity, regulatory pathway and
technology financing. Students will work
in groups to develop commercialization
reports based on real intellectual property
disclosures, preforming due diligence to
identify areas of opportunity and challenges
of their technologies. Based upon the
commercialization report, students¿ groups
will create a hypothetical company, and evolve
their technology analyses into investor-like
presentations delivered at a mock pitch session
at the end of the term.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BME 513: Introduction To Optical &
Terahertz Imaging
This course provides the foundations for
advanced topics in modern optical imaging
techniques, including nonlinear optics,

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Fourier optics, ultrafast time-domain and
terahertz spectroscopy and imaging. The
emphasis will be on connecting theory to
modern technological advancements and their
biomedical applications. The course consists of
the following four general modules: Review of
fundamental Optics; Nonlinear Optics; Fourier
Optics; Ultrafast and Terahertz Optics
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BME 515: Biomedical Optical Imaging
An introduction to the principles and
applications of biomedical optical imaging,
with an emphasis on high-resolution imaging
and spectroscopy. This course provides
a conceptual overview, along with basic
mathematical theory (assignments), of
some of the key concepts that are relevant
to biomedical optical imaging, including
Gaussian beams, refraction, total internal
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BME 517: Radiation Physics
This graduate offering provides an initial
physical background required for the study
of the Medical Physics. Sources of ionizing
radiation including radioactivity (natural and
manmade) and x-ray producing devices are
studied as well as sources of nonionizing
radiation such as radiofrequency and
ultrasound. The physical aspects of these
radiations are characterized by their interaction
with matter and methods for their detection.
Each student will select and present a proposal
for solving a clinical medical physics problem.
Prerequisites: Modern Physics or equivalent
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BME 518: Radiobiology
The biological consequences of irradiation
(ionizing, ultrasound, laser, RF, etc.) will be
examined. Interaction mechanisms will first
be examined followed by examination of the
radiation impact at the molecular and cellular
level. The use of radiation for therapeutic gain
will be considered. As well, models will be
developed for risk estimates. Topics to be
covered will include: target theory, biological
response, NSD and risk estimates.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
BME 519: Medical Health Physics
This course discusses the health physics and
safety issues associated with radiological
devices, facilities and procedures.
Prerequisite: BME 517.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
BME 520: Lab Rotation I
28

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

BME 521: Lab Rotation II

microarrays, and tools for determining gene
function by perturbation of gene expression.

BME 525: Tissue Engineering
Course deals with basics of biomaterial
formulation that are relevant to tissue
engineering, leading to the principles and
practice of designing an engineered tissue,
which will be facilitated by a design project.

Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
BME 526: Biological Systems
Engineering
This course is a hands-on study of systems
engineering in biology, using computer
modeling to conceptualize and simulate a wide
variety of applications. All skills taught in
class. Appropriate and applicable to all BME
tracks. May not be repeated for credit.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BME 530: Medical Image Formation
This course covers the physical aspects of
medical image formation. Image receptor
design/optimization, reconstruction
techniques, device hardware and performance
characteristics are considered.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BME 531: Biosensing and Bioimaging
Basic concepts of biosensing and bioimaging,
which include the elements of biological
systems and bioimmobilizers, traditional
electrode and novel optical transducers, and
advanced biomedical optical imaging systems.

BME 540: Radiation Oncology Physics
This course provides a background in
therapeutic instrumentation, dosimetry and
treatment planning.
Prerequisite: BME 517
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BME 546: Statistical Analysis of
Physiological Data
Statistical methods useful in analyzing
common types of physiological data. Topics
include probability, data distributions,
hypothesis testing, with parametric and nonparametric methods, ANOVA, regression and
correlation and power analysis. Emphasis is on
experimental design and appropriate, efficient
use of statistical software.
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BME 547: Model-Based Analysis of
Physiological Data
The analysis of common biochemical
and physiological data by non-linear
regression of data models and biophysical
models of physiological and biochemical
processes. Examples include binding kinetics,
compartmental mass transfer and spectral
analysis.
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

BME 548: Measurement and Analysis
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) in Physiological Research
The acquisition and analysis of data-arising
BME 532: Time Series Modeling of
from common biochemical and physiological
Biological Systems
measurements. Topics include computerA unified mathematical/time series framework
based data acquisition and processing,
for modeling and mining biological data.
densitometry, microscopy, and image analysis
Applications range from cardio-respiratory,
and processing. Emphasis is on experimental
renal blood pressure/flow and sequence (DNA,
design and strategies for optimizing signal to
RNA, proteins) to gene expression data. Tools
noise ratio of measurements.
of analysis include neural networks, time1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
invariant and time-varying spectral methods,
fractal and nonlinear dynamics techniques,
BME 549: Experimental Techniques in
hidden Markov Model, clustering analysis, and
Systems Physiology
various system identification techniques.
A series of lectures and laboratory exercises
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
designed to introduce students to invitro
etc.)
experimental techniques used in systems
physiology. Emphasis will be placed on
BME 534: Functional Genomics
the ethical use of rodents in biomedical
Course provides foundation in concepts of
research and the measurement of physiological
functional genomics and proteomics. Topics
variables. Data acquisition and analysis
include organization and complexity of
procedures used in cardio-vascular,
the mammalian genome and mechanisms
respiratory, neural and renal physiology will
of expression of genes, gene expression
also be covered.
analysis technologies with a strong focus
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
on construction and utilization of DNA
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

BME 550: Mathematical Models of
Physiologic & Biophysical Systems
An introduction to mathematical modeling of
cell and tissue function. Topics include the
derivation and numerical solution of models
of cell homeostasis, membrane transport and
excitability, and cell signaling and metabolism.
Grading is based on problems, student
presentation, and completion of a modeling
project.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BME 558: Physical & Quantitative
Biology
¿¿This is a course on the principles of physical
chemistry. We describe the nature of the forces
and energies and entropies that drive molecular
systems toward their states of equilibrium.
We consider a broad range of applications
throughout chemistry, biology, materials
engineering and nanoscience. This course aims
to give students an understanding of how the
actions and behaviors of materials arise from
their atomic and molecular structures. Colisted with PHY 558 and CHE 558.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BME 571: Microfluids in Biological
Systems
This course will outline theory and
applications of special fluid handling
conditions associated with living systems.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BME 572: Biomolecular Analysis
This interdisciplinary course is intended
for graduate students and advanced
undergraduates in departments such as
Biomedical Engineering, Chemistry, Physics,
Biology and Chemical Engineering. This
course will give an introduction to single
molecule experiments using fluorescence,
optical traps, AFM cantilevers, microneedles,
magnetic microbeads as well as micro and
nanofluidic devices.
Prerequisites: BME 501 and 502, or instructor
approval.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BME 573: iPhone Programming for
Medical Applications
iPhone Programming for Medical
Applications.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BME 581: Biomedical Nanofabrication
This one-semester, three section course,
serves as an introduction to the applications of
nanofabrication to various fields of importance
to biomedical engineering. This will be done
by a combination of examining how nature has
29

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
accomplished nano-scale feats, how we can
measure this, and whether we can duplicate
nature¿s functions in vitro. A significant
portion of the course includes technical
communications, in the form of a written
report and oral lecture component to class.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BME 590: Biomedical Engineering
Seminar
A weekly meeting devoted to current graduate
student work in the program in Biomedical
Engineering. Enrolled students present seminar
each week throughout the semester, participate
in seminars and responsible conduct of
research training.
0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
BME 595: BME MS Project
This course is taken M.S. students who select
MS Project track. Conducted jointly by
graduate students and one or more members
of the faculty. A final project report must
be submitted to the advisor as well as to the
Graduate Program Director. Without the
submitted report, credits from this course
cannot be applied toward the MS degree.
1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
BME 599: Biomedical Engineering
Research
Research to be supported by a faculty member
of the Department of Biomedical Engineering.
Students must have permission of instructor
to enroll in appropriate section. Faculty to be
identified by the student.
Fall and Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
BME 601: Cardiovascular Fluid
Mechanics
The course will cover the application of fluid
mechanics principles to the analysis of blood
flow in the cardiovascular system under
normal and pathological conditions. It will
follow an historical time line by beginning
with the most basic models of arterial blood
flow, and proceed to the most advanced
theories related to physiology and pathology
flow phenomena, including an examination of
the most up to date research in the area and the
development of devices and implants.
Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BME 602: Topics in Biomedical
Applications of Neural Networks
This is a project based course which includes
weekly seminars discussing advanced

Spring 2021
topics in fuzzy logic and neural networks
and their applications, in biomedical
devices. Applications include drug delivery,
diagnostics, management information
handling. Students utilize simulation software
to develop algorithms to deal successfully with
training data sets of their own choosing.
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
BME 603: Advanced Quantitative
Human Physiology
This course is intended to provide a deep and
rigorous understanding of human physiology
using a quantitative approach. This course
will develop the physical, chemical and
mathematical foundation of physiology, which
is then applied to membranes, transport,
metabolisms, excitable cells and various organ
systems. A major component of this course
will be an individual project requiring mastery
of concepts developed in class.

Co-scheduled with BME 402
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BME 610: Magnetic Resonance
This course provides a comprehensive study
of magnetic resonance and its applications in
medical imaging. An introduction of NMR is
followed with development of the hardware
and processing aspects required for MR image
formation. An overview of basic and advanced
MR imaging techniques is provided. Each
student will select a topic in MR imaging for
presentation at the conclusion of the course.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

BME 611: Positron Emission
Tomography
Positron emission tomography (PET) is a
unique and powerful functional imaging
method used in the clinic and in medical
research. It is a multidisciplinary endeavor
involving the fields of chemistry, physics,
mathematics and medicine. This course
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
addresses the disparate areas of science
underlying PET imaging, including
BME 604: Finite Element Modeling in
radioisotope production, radiotracer
Biology and Medicine
synthesis, the physics of the imaging
Both finite difference and FEM are applied
process, quantitative data processing, image
to solve the equations of incompressible and
reconstruction approaches, data analysis, and
compressible fluid flow in porous media with
emphasis on flows in skeletal tissues, i.e., bone tracer kinetic modeling to extract quantitative
physiological parameters. Radioactive
and cartilage. Steady-state, transient flow,
permeability and surface boundary conditions validation and applications of PET will also be
covered including the area of drug addiction.
are discussed. Practical and recent studies in
There is a hands-on component in which
the field are also discussed. Programming
students will visit an active PET research
using FORTRAN or C languages will be
center and acquire and manipulate PET data.
required. The student is also introduced to
commercially available software packages.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BME 605: Biomechanics of Tactile
Sensory Systems
Detailed study of the biomechanics of tactile
neurophysiology for engineers entering the
field of haptics and robotics manipulations.
Anatomy and electrophysiology of transducer
cells and neurons starting at the fingertips
and extending to the somatosensory cortex.
Characteristics of the external stimulus and
its peripheral transformation. Relations of
these topics to perceptual and/or behavioral
responses.
Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BME 608: Contemporary
Biotechnology
General discussion on the nature of
biotechnology and its historical development,
applications, impact, consequences, and some
of the social and ethical considerations.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

BME 612: Biomedical Engineering
Aspects for the Use of Radiation in
Medicine
This course provides a comprehensive study
of the use of radiation in medicine. Physical
aspects of the interaction of radiation with
matter and for the radiation production
are initially considered. The underlying
principles of current radiation based medical
imaging is considered next. Topics include
radiography, fluoroscopy, radionuclide
imaging and computed tomography. The use
of radiation for the treatment of malignancy
is considered with the focus on required
technology. Finally advanced applications
of radiation are considered with focus on
imaging and treatment. Each student will
select a topic examining the engineering or
technical application of radiation in medicine
for presentation at the conclusion of the
course.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
30

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

BME 615: Clinical Nuclear Imaging
This course is designed to prepare the Medical
Physics graduate student in the area of clinical
Medical Imaging. In this clinical rotation,
medical physics methods for: planar film, DR,
CR, mamography, fluoroscopy, CT, ultrasound
and MRI performance evaluations will be
introduced. In addition, basic medical ethics,
radiographic anatomy and radiation safety will
be covered. A total of 200 clinical hours will
be completed in this program

in collaboration with BNL. The material is
oriented to cover basic and state of the art
concepts in space radiation environment,
physics and radiobiology. Content includes
basic concepts in physics, dosimetry,
radiobiology, space radiation problems and
accelerator operations. Concurrent sessions are
provided to complete specific BNL training
and plan and prepare experiments for low- and
high-LET radiation exposures. Students are
trained in NSRL operations and are able to
run control experiments using gamma rays in
Prerequisites: BME 517; BME 518; BME 519;
preparation for NSRL runs, and subsequently
BME 530 or BME 540.
experiments at the NSRL using heavy ions.
Fall, 4 credits, S/U grading
Data are obtained from different endpoints are
discussed and analyzed with the instructors.
BME 616: Clinical Nuclear Medicine
Homework are used to test the student's
Imaging
level of comprehension of the lectures and
This course is designed to prepare the Medical
laboratory activities. The write up of a full
Physics graduate student in the area of clinical
BNL beam time request proposal is required of
Nuclear Medicine Imaging. In this clinical
each student.
rotation, the students will be exposed to
4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
radionuclide processes, radiopharmaceuticlas
including radioactive gases and aerosolsBME 670: Special Topics in Biomedical
prepartio, characteristics and radiation
Engineering
dosimetry, in vitro and in vivo radiation
Varying topics covering current active research
detection systems, imaging systems and their
projects and professional development skills
performance evaluations. In addition, basic
for Biomedical Engineers. This course is
medical ethics, clinical interpretations and
designed to give the necessary flexibility to
radiation safety will be covered. A total of
students and faculty to introduce and refine
150 clinical hours will be completed in this
new material into the curriculum before it
program.
has attracted sufficient interest to be made
Fall, 4 credits, S/U grading
part of the regular course material. Topics
BME 617: Clinical Radiation Oncology include biomedical engineering, regenerative
medicine, bioimaging, biomechanics, career
Physics
planning, negotiation, communications, longThis course is designed to prepare the Medical
range planning, among others.
Physics graduate student in the area of clinical
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
radiation oncology physics. In this clinical
May be repeated for credit.
rotation, the student will learn by observation
and participation some of a selection of
the following medical physics procedures:
LINAC Beam Dosimetry (ion chamber
measurement techniques, film dosimetry
(radiographic and radiochromic), diode
dosimetry, TLD dosimetry, water phantom
scanning), implementation of photon and
electon beam calibration protocols (AAPM
TG51), LINAC beam data measurement and
tabulation, commissioning a TPS system,
LINAC, acceptance testing, LINAC monthly
QA, HDR QA and planning, and IMRT
inverse planning and IMRT clinical QA. A
total of 120 clinical hours will be completed in
this program. Prerequisite: BME 517 and BME
540 with a B+ or better.
Spring, 4 credits, S/U grading
BME 620: Space Radiation Biology
An extensive series of lectures, training
sessions and laboratory activities sponsored
by the NASA's Radiation Health Program

BME 690: Biomedical Engineering
Research
Biomedical Engineering research for doctoral
students who have already received their
M.S. degree, but have not yet advanced to
candidacy.
Fall and Spring, 1-9 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
BME 698: Practicum in Teaching
Undergraduate teaching to be supervised by a
faculty member of the Program in Biomedical
Engineering. Course to be identified by the
student and graduate studies director.
Fall and Spring, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
BME 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Prerequisite: Students must be advanced to
candidacy (G5); permission of instructor and
enroll in appropriate section. Major portion
of research must take place on SBU campus,
at Cold Spring Harbor, or at the Brookhaven
National Lab.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
BME 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
BME 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
in MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.
All international students must received
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
BME 800: BME RESEARCH
Full-time summer research.
S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

BMI
Biomedical Informatics
BMI 501: Introduction to Biomedical
Informatics
This course introduces the unique
characteristics of clinical and life science
data and the methods for representation
31

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
and transformation of biomedical data,
information, and knowledge to improve
human health. The course will provide an
overview of basic concepts and will serve
as a Launchpad into other more focused
courses that explore the computational and
analytics needs of BMI, as well as the clinical,
research and translational applications of
informatics. There will be three major themes:
Information representation, management and
sharing: biomedical data representation and
management; standards, terminologies, and
ontologies such as HL7, IHE, SNOMED,
ICD-9; Privacy, confidentiality and data
sharing. Clinical Informatics: Health care
environment and processes; electronic
health records and management; clinical
decision making clinical information retrieval
clinical natural language processing. Imaging
informatics: radiological image modalities;
DICOM and PACS systems; computeraided diagnosis; digital pathology; analytical
pathology imaging. This course will provide
hand-on assignments for the participants
to familiarize the concepts. Prerequisite:
Graduate standing in BMI or permission of
instructor.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BMI 502: Life Sciences for Biomedical
Informatics
This course presents the fundamentals of
human cell biology, biochemistry, genetics
and cell/organ physiology. The biochemical
and molecular bases of cell structure, energy
metabolism, gene regulation, heredity, and
development are discussed, as are the structure
and function of cell membranes and the
physiology of cell to cell signaling, cellular
respiration, and homeostasis of organs and
individuals. Can be used for credit toward
masters or doctoral degree in BMI only with
permission and NOT in addition to BMI 503.
Can NOT be used for credit toward certificate
in Biomedical Informatics.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring 2021
including sequential and decision logic and
loops. Data and file operations are explained
including processing arrays, sorting, stacks,
queues, linked lists, and binary trees. Objectoriented programming and sequential file
applications are discussed. Can be used for
credit toward masters or doctoral degree
in BMI only with permission and NOT in
addition to BMI 502. Can NOT be used
for credit toward certificate in Biomedical
Informatics.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BMI 511: Translational Bioinformatics
This course will provide students with
an integrative computational toolbox
at the intersection between Biomedical
and Quantitative Sciences. Students will
develop storage, analytic, and interpretive
methods to optimize the transformation
of large biomedical and genomic datasets,
into proactive, predictive, preventive, and
participatory health information. Applying
a working knowledge of Computational
Statistics in a Biomedical/Biomolecular
context, students will gain the ability
integrate those Computational Tools and Big
Data resources in the Biomedical research
enterprise as well as in the clinical workflow.
Accordingly, this course will familiarize
the participants with the data processing
methodologies associated with a range of
biological signals that spans from Biological
sequences to Histology images, and from
mining medical records to Genome Wide
Association Studies (GWAS) and gene
prioritization.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BMI 512: Clinical Informatics
This course offers a comprehensive study of
Clinical Informatics. It provides a holistic
review of the health care delivery system
both historically and presently. It presents
Clinical Informatics and its legal and ethical
issues, followed by an overview of Clinical
Informatics. This includes data content and
structures; nomenclatures and classification
systems; quality, performance, utilization,
and risk management; Clinical Informatics
databases; and a review of statistics and
research. Clinical informatics management
principles and theories presented include
change, project, and knowledge management.
Aspects of human resources and financial
management, including reimbursement
methodologies are presented as these relate to
Clinical Informatics.

BMI 503: Computer Science for
Biomedical Informatics
This course presents the fundamentals of
computer science and problem solving for
computer programming. Students learn how
computers store and manipulate data using
programming languages and algorithms and
how computers are controlled by operating
systems and networked. Software engineering,
data abstractions, and database management
systems are described. Applications include
computer graphics and artificial intelligence. A 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
theory of computing is presented. Approaches
to devising solutions to problem are discussed. BMI 513: Imaging Informatics
Structured programming tools are presented
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Imaging Informatics is a multidisciplinary
field which intersects Clinical Informatics,
medical physics, engineering, computer and
information sciences. It touches concepts
across the whole imaging chain, including
image creation and acquisition, image
distribution and management, image storage
and retrieval, image processing, analysis
and understanding, image visualization and
interpretation. The goals of the course are
to gain familiarity with the terminology,
core concepts, and standard practices,
understand the current state of the field and
enable critical reading of the literature and
to perform research. The course will cover
both radiological imaging and pathology
imaging. Topics include: radiological
imaging modalities, DICOM standards,
image management and PACS systems,
image exchange and IHE, image processing
techniques, content based image retrieval,
structured reporting and annotations, image
visualization, digital pathology and analytical
pathology imaging. The course will also cover
emerging technologies in Imaging Informatics.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BMI 514: Imaging Informatics Analysis
This course will give an overview of
the analytical aspects of the Biomedical
Imaging Informatics. Topics include image
visualization, enhancement, processing and
analysis, with focus on the applications in
medical fields. It covers a broad spectrums of
biomedical image analysis techniques: image
enhancement, segmentation, registration,
texture analysis, morphometry, and
tractography. Their applications in diagnostic
and therapeutic imaging will be extensively
discussed. The course will also cover a
wide range of image modalities: Magnetic
resonance imaging (with its various subtypes),
Computed tomography, Ultrasound, Positron
emission tomography, Single-photon emission
computed tomography, etc., with an emphasis
on the interplay and fusion of multi-source
information. The computation/analysis will be
carried out using languages such as Matlab, C+
+, Python, Java, etc., based on well tested open
sources algorithm packages such as the Insight
Toolkit. Moreover, softwares more geared
towards end-users, such as 3D Slicer, ImageJ,
FreeSurfer, etc. will also be introduced.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BMI 517: Current Research in
Signaling Pathways, Biochemistry, and
Tissue Morphology of Disease
In this seminar course, students will explore
current knowledge and lines of research
inquiry for a disease of their choice, with
respect to Signaling Pathways, Biochemistry,
32

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
and Tissue Morphology. Students will learn to
analyze and synthesize research literature for a
particular disease topic and propose a testable
hypothesis for a research project that would
advance one or more lines of research inquiry
for the disease. Students will provide feedback
for other students¿ literature reviews.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BMI 520: Data Analytics and Software
Stacks
This course will cover cutting-edge data
analytic applications, infrastructure, and
analytic methods. Students will have the
opportunity to analyze real (de-identified)
healthcare datasets and spatio-temporal
and molecular datasets drawn from cancer
research. Each class session will include
discussions of applications, infrastructure, and
algorithms. Students will present papers, and
there will also be guest lectures from visiting
experts. Students will attend lectures, present
and critique papers, and work with a team of
students on a substantial project throughout the
semester. Students are expected to demonstrate
a high level of independence, critical thinking,
and initiative.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BMI 530: Software Development in
Biomedical Informatics
This is an advanced topic in the BMI series,
designed for participants with plans to develop
Biomedical Informatics software applications.
The BMI530 course is divided in two parts.
The first part will provide an overview of
approaches to software development in a
Biomedical context, where reproducibility,
governance and availability are particular
concerns. The participants will be introduced,
hands-on, to practices such as the use of
version control services (such as GitHub),
collaborative development models (such as
agile programming, extreme programming,
unit testing, continuous code review, pair
programming etc) and software architectural
patterns (such as Model-View-Controller,
MVC, and Model-View-Adapter, MVA).
The increasing reliance on Cloud Computing
infrastructure and Web 3.0 technologies for
both software development and deployment
will be object of particular attention. The
increasing reliance on Big Data resources
in Biomedicine, and the broadening use of
Web Computing will be approached as part
of the exercise of configuring class projects
for the second part of the course. Accordingly,
a particular focus will be put on the use
of Representation State Transfer (REST)
architectures and hands-on familiarization
with REST APIs (Application Programming
Interfaces). The second part of the course

Spring 2021
will put these concepts into practice through
the development of small software projects.
Groups of one to three people per project
development team will be configured to
develop software that solves problems brought
to the class by the participants, preferably, but
not necessarily, as contributions to manuscripts
and/or funded research. Prerequisite: BMI 503
and programming experience, BMI 520, or
permission by instructor (face-to-face meeting
required).
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BMI 540: Statistical Methods in
Biomedical Informatics
Recent advances in high-throughput
experimental technologies generate enormous
amounts of data. In order to extract insights
from such large-scale data sets, robust
statistical models and efficient computation
methods are indispensable. This course
introduces probability and statistical modeling
and analytical methods commonly used in
biomedical-informatics. Basic probability
theory will be briefly reviewed and the
course will focus on the construction and
solving of statistical modeling based on real
biomedical data sets. The methods covered
include maximum likelihood estimation,
Bayesian inference, dynamic programming,
Markov Models, Monte Carlo simulation,
classification and clustering. Students will
learn to use statistical programs and related
resources locally and on the Internet, with
an emphasis on the computational aspects
of the statistical models in order to harness
the ever-growing hardware power. Upon
finishing the course, the students will master
advanced applications of statistical computing
in a wide range of biological and biomedical
problems. PREREQUISITES: BMI 501; Basic
knowledge in probability theory, algorithms
and programming experience in R/MATLAB/
C/C++ are expected. Knowledge in biology is
a plus but not a must.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BMI 550: Clinical Informatics Practice
Patterns
This course provides detailed information on
Clinical Informatics in a variety of practice
settings including hospitals, freestanding
ambulatory care, managed care, dialysis,
correctional facilities, long-term and acute
mental health, substance abuse, developmental
disabilities, long-term care, rehabilitation,
home health, hospice, dental, veterinary, and
consulting. The role of Clinical Informatics
in each setting is described with respect
to regulatory issues; documentation;
reimbursement and funding; information
management, including data flow, coding and

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

classification, computer systems, and data
set; quality improvement, utilization and risk
management, and legal issues; the role of the
Clinical Informatics professional, and changes
and trends.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BMI 551: Case Studies in Clinical
Informatics
This course presents cases based on reallife challenges in Clinical Informatics.
Critical thinking is essential for the Clinical
Informatics professional and case studies
demand that students develop thought and
action plans and then, in class, present and
defend their choices. Each case exposes the
student to a complex Clinical Informatics
scenario, requiring the student to synthesize
information and strategically solve problems
using Clinical Informatics principals. Learning
through the case method helps students to
¿bridge the gap¿ from content knowledge for
previous and/or current courses to on-the-job
Clinical Informatics experience.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BMI 552: Quality Improvement
Methods for Clinical Informatics
Teaches health care management professionals
how to perform improvement projects and
incorporate quantitative measurement into
daily work routines to form the foundation
for a quality improvement-oriented culture.
Using Minitab software, provides strategies
to gather and analyze the data needed to plan,
implement, monitor, and evaluate health care
quality improvement initiatives.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BMI 560: Personalized Medicine
This course is focused on the multidisciplinary
research and clinical context associated
with the development of personalized
health care delivery solutions. It will place
particular emphasis on assessing opportunities
identified by translational and operational
research of the clinical settings that define
the practical utility of personalized medicine.
Accordingly, the clinical decision support
systems (CDS)[JA1] being developed for
clinical pharmacogenomics, specifically
those that establish pharmacotyping in drug
prescription, will play a central role in this
course. Its content will cover innovative
drug formulations and nanotheranostics,
molecular imaging and signatures, medical
genomics[JA2] , translational nanomedicine
and informatics, stem cell therapy approaches,
modeling and predictability of drug response,
pharmacogenetics-guided drug prescription,
pediatric drug dosing, pharmacovigilance
and regulatory aspects, ethical and cost33

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
effectiveness issues, pharmacogenomics
knowledge bases, personal genome
sequencing, molecular diagnostics, as well as
information-based medicine.

Spring 2021
graduate students and one or more members of
the faculty.

topics will be discussed, particularly those of
current interest.

1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

BMI 598: M.S. Capstone Project in
Biomedical Informatics
M.S. Independent Capstone project planning
and project execution under the supervision
of a Biomedical Informatics faculty member.
Only open to M.S. students in Biomedical
Informatics who will do a Capstone project.
Credits earned from BMI 599 may not be
used to fulfill requirements for students in
Biomedical Informatics who will write an M.S.
thesis and not do a Capstone project.

BMI 690: Independent Study in
Biomedical Informatics
Independent study in Biomedical Informatics.
Must have the approval of the Research and
Directed Study Committee of the Department
of Biomedical Informatics prior to registration.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BMI 590: Independent Study in
Biomedical Informatics
Independent study in Biomedical Informatics.
Must have the approval of the Research and
Directed Study Committee of the Department
of Biomedical Informatics prior to registration.
Prerequisite: Graduate standing in BMI, or
permission of instructor
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
BMI 591: Independent Reading in
Biomedical Informatics
Supplementary specialized readings in
Biomedical Informatics for graduate students
under faculty supervision. Must have the
approval of the Research and Directed Study
Committee of the Department of Biomedical
Informatics prior to registration.
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.

1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
BMI 599: M.S. Research and Thesis in
Biomedical Informatics
M.S. Research and Thesis project under the
supervision of a Biomedical Informatics
faculty member. Only open to M.S. students
in Biomedical Informatics who will write an
M.S. thesis. Credits earned from BMI 599
may not be used to fulfill requirements for
students in Biomedical Informatics who will
do a Capstone project and not write an M.S.
thesis.

BMI 592: Biomedical Informatics
Masters Pre-Candidates Seminar
1-12 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
This course is designed to expose students to
current research and other topics in Biomedical May be repeated for credit.
Informatics. Speakers are invited from both on
BMI 620: Advanced Topics in Clinical
and off campus.
Informatics
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
The subject matter of each special topics
May be repeated for credit.
course varies from semester to semester,
BMI 595: Special Topics in Biomedical depending on the interests of students and
faculty. Advanced topics and specialized
Informatics
topics will be discussed, particularly those of
Examination of special topics on artificial
current interest.
intelligence in Biomedical Informatics. We
present and critique literature on artificial
intelligence in biomedicine, including but not
limited to machine learning, signal processing,
and deep learning. The literature will span
different fields of biomedical informatics such
as imaging informatics, computational biology,
clinical informatics etc. Students are required
to review articles and connect the presented
techniques to a bigger picture context within
the different fields of biomedical informatics.
Following the article presentation, the thoughts
that the article provoked will be discussed
together.
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
BMI 596: Special Problems in
Biomedical Informatics
Examination of special problems in
Biomedical Informatics, conducted jointly by

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
BMI 622: Advanced Topics in
Translational Bioinformatics
The subject matter of each special topics
course varies from semester to semester,
depending on the interests of students and
faculty. Advanced topics and specialized
topics will be discussed, particularly those of
current interest.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
BMI 625: Advanced Topics in Imaging
Informatics
The subject matter of each special topics
course varies from semester to semester,
depending on the interests of students and
faculty. Advanced topics and specialized

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BMI 691: Independent Reading in
Biomedical Informatics
Supplementary specialized readings in
Biomedical Informatics for graduate students
under faculty supervision. Must have the
approval of the Research and Directed Study
Committee of the Department of Biomedical
Informatics prior to registration.
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BMI 692: Biomedical Informatics
Candidates Seminar
This course is designed to expose students to
current research and other topics in Biomedical
Informatics. Speakers are invited from both on
and off campus.
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
BMI 695: Special Topics in Biomedical
Informatics
Examination of special topics in Biomedical
Informatics, by one or more members of the
faculty.
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
BMI 696: Special Problems in BMI
Examination of special problems in
Biomedical Informatics, conducted jointly by
graduate students and one or more members of
the faculty.
1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BMI 697: Practicum in Teaching I
An introduction to teaching Biomedical
Informatics, including course design, learning
theory, evaluation of teaching, and teaching
with technology.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BMI 698: Practicum in Teaching II
Graduate students assist the faculty in teaching
by conducting recitation or laboratory sections
that supplement a lecture course.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

34

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

BMI 699: Dissertation Research-On
Campus
Independent research conducted on campus
under the supervision of a Biomedical
Informatics faculty member in support of the
Ph.D. Dissertation. Permission to register
requires the agreement of the faculty member
to supervise the research. May be repeated

BNB 552: Neurobiological Techniques
A series of laboratory exercises designed
to give students hands-on experience in the
basic laboratory techniques of contemporary
neuroscience. Includes intracellular and
extracellular recording, neuronal tissue culture,
neuroanatomical techniques, and integrative
physiology.

1-12 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Fall, 2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

BMI 700: Dissertation Research-Off
Campus, Domestic
Independent research conducted off campus,
in the United States, under the supervision of
a Biomedical Informatics faculty member in
support of the Ph.D. Dissertation. Permission
to register requires the agreement of the faculty
member to supervise the research. May be
repeated
1-2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
BMI 701: Dissertation Research-Off
Campus, International
Independent research conducted off
campus, outside the United States, under
the supervision of a Biomedical Informatics
faculty member in support of the Ph.D.
Dissertation. Permission to register requires
the agreement of the faculty member to
supervise the research.
1-12 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
BMI 800: Full-Time Summer Research
Independent research conducted off campus,
in the United States, under the supervision of
a Biomedical Informatics faculty member in
support of the Ph.D. Dissertation. Permission
to register requires the agreement of the faculty
member to supervise the research. May be
repeated.
0-12 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

BNB
Neurobiology and Behavior
BNB 551: Writing Neuroscience
Seminar course for doctoral students in
Neuroscience providing practical instruction
in written communication in Neuroscience.
Topics include writing effective abstracts,
cover letters, figure captions, and grant
specific aims, among others.
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

BNB 555: Laboratory Rotations in
Neuroscience
Course for doctoral students in Neuroscience
in which students participate in three formal
laboratory rotations in program faculty
laboratories during the first year. Student
make oral presentations for each rotation.
Instruction is provided in how to organize and
present material in a seminar format, including
the proper use of visual aids. Enrollment
restricted to students in the Graduate Program
in Neuroscience.
Fall and Spring, 0-5 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
BNB 560: Introduction to Mammalian
Neuroanatomy
This course consists of visual presentations
and supplemental lectures providing an
overview of the structural organization of the
nervous system. The mammalian nervous
system and its sensory, motor and cognitive
components are emphasized. Opportunities
for examination of whole brains and historical
sections, and some hands-on experience with
basic neuroanatomical techniques may also be
available.
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BNB 561: Introduction to Neuroscience
I
First of a two semester core course introducing
students to basic principles of neuroscience.
The major focus is cellular and molecular
neurosicence. Topics covered include the
ionic basis of resting potentials and electrical
excitability, the structure, function and
molecular biology of voltage- and ligand-gated
ion channels, exocytosis, cellular networks,
and gene regulation.
4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BNB 562: Introduction to Neuroscience
II
Second of two-semester core course
introducing students to basic principles of
neuroscience. The major focus is systems
neuroscience. Topics covered include analyses
of all major sensory systems, motor systems,

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

and systems mediating higher order, cognitive
functions in the nervous system.
4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BNB 563: Advanced Topics in
Neuroscience: Individual Learning
Plans
In this 12 hour module course, students will
work with an identified faculty preceptor on
an agreed upon topic of interest. Agreement
of preceptor and an outline of the topic must
be submitted to and approved by the Course
Director in order for students to register for
this class. Students and preceptors will work
together to develop a reading list (minimum
6-10 papers) from the primary literature that
adequately covers the topic. Students will
present two or more of these papers in journal
club format to the preceptor and to a larger
group, e.g., a lab group, as applicable. Students
will also synthesize their readings into a
written report that follows one of the following
Nature Reviews Neuroscience formats (below,
but strict adherence to word limits, reference
numbers, etc., is NOT expected). NOTE:
Students and their research faculty mentors
are strongly encouraged to consider using
this as a vehicle for beginning to develop the
Introduction to the thesis/thesis proposal.
Offered:
Fall, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
BNB 564: Advanced Topics
in Neuroscience: Curriculum
Development
In this 12 hour module course, students will
work with an identified faculty preceptor on
an agreed upon topic of interest that addresses
a gap in the current Graduate Program in
Neuroscience curriculum. Agreement of
preceptor and an outline of the topic selected
must be submitted to and approved by the
Course Director in order for students to
register for this class. Students and preceptors
will work together to develop a course
based on the selected topic. Students will
first investigate principles of curricular
design. They will follow these in generating
a course description, a list of overall learning
objectives, and a detailed syllabus that
identifies the titles, learning objectives and
required background readings for each of
the course¿s sessions. Required readings
much include both texts and the primary
literature. Students will also generate the inclass materials for at least two class sessions.
One must be a Powerpoint for a standard
lecture, and one must be any materials needed
for some form of active learning (individual
or group) of the material. Finally, students
must identify the means that students will be
35

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
evaluated, and identify how these methods will
demonstrate achievement of the stated learning
objectives, keeping in mind that the form of
evaluation will differ depending on whether
objectives are related to knowledge, skills,
etc. NOTE: Students and their research faculty
mentors are strongly encouraged to consider
using this as a vehicle for delving deeply into a
topic or technique of interest that is relevant to
the thesis/thesis proposal. Offered:
Fall, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
BNB 565: Advanced Neuroscience
A modular course introducing concepts in the
development of the nervous system. Topics
can include neuroembryology, neuronal
differentiation, synapse formation, and
specificity and plasticity of connections in
vertebrates and invertebrates.

Spring 2021
synaptic, imaging, spike and behavioral)
in the MATLAB (or similar) computing
environment.
2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BNB 568: Statistics and Data Analysis
in Neuroscience II: Applications
BNB 597: Seminar Themes
This course focuses on current research topics
in neuroscience and is integrated with the
Neuroscience Seminar Series. It is centered on
a common research theme. Students discuss
manuscripts, attend seminars and meet with
outside speakers.

May be repeated for credit.
BNB 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

Offered Fall/
BNB 701: Dissertation Research off
Spring, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) Campus - International
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
BNB 599: Research
place outside of the United States and/or
Offered
Original investigation undertaken with
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
Fall, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
supervision of a member of the staff.
option of the health plan and may also enroll
May be repeated for credit.
Fall and Spring, 1-12 credits, S/U grading
in MEDEX. International students who are
May be repeated for credit.
in their home country are not covered by
BNB 566: Neurobiology of Disease
mandatory health plan and must contact the
This advanced seminar course is coordinated
BNB 655: Neuropharmacology
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
with the Neurobiology of Disease lecture
An advanced course for graduate students
be removed. International students who are
series hosted by the Program in Neuroscience
interested
in
developing
an
understanding
not in their home country are charged for the
each Spring semester. The Program invites
of neuropharmacology and research on this
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
5-6 distinguished scientists to present
covered by another insurance plan they must
research seminars organized around the broad topic. Following a general introduction to the
nerve
cell
structure,
synaptic
and
chemical
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
topic of neurobiological and neurological
transmission,
three
themes
receptors,
receptors
charge will only be removed if other plan is
diseases. Students read and discuss papers
as channels, and G-protein-coupled receptors
deemed comparable.
recommended by the guest speakers. This
are
developed.
Recent
advances
in
cell
and
course also provides students the opportunity
All international students must received
molecular biology provide the framework
to meet with the guest seminar speakers.
clearance from an International Advisor.
for instruction and discussion. This course
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
Offered
is offered as both HBH 655 and BNB 655.
May be repeated for credit.
Spring, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) Prerequisiste: Admission to Graduate Health
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
Sciences Center Program.
BNB 800: SUMMER RESEARCH
BNB 567: Statistics and Data Analysis Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
May be repeated for credit.
etc.)
in Neuroscience I: Foundations
This course will introduce students to the
fundamental principles and methods of the
statistical analysis of neural and behavioral
data. A major focus of the course will be
on how to properly design experiments
to test hypotheses, how to avoid common
misconceptions and errors in data analysis
and how to report statistics correctly in
manuscripts submitted for publication.
This course will am at providing a rigorous
foundation of general statistical principles that
can be applied generally, with an emphasis
on material of high relevance to biology
and neuroscience. A companion course
(¿statistics and data analysis for neuroscience
II: Applications¿) will turn to selected
applications to neuroscience. The students
will also have the opportunity to hone their
statistics skills by analyzing different types
of datasets (genetic, molecular, cellular,

BNB 697: Neuroscience Seminar
Series
Seminar presentations delivered by faculty,
associates, students and visiting speakers.
Fall and Spring, 0-2 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
BNB 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Original investigations undertaken as part of
the Ph.D. program under the supervision of
the dissertation committee. Prerequisite: Must
be advanced to candidacy (G5). Major portion
of research must take place on SBU campus,
at Cold Spring Harbor, or at the Brookhaven
National Lab.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U
grading

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

BSB
Biochemistry and Structural
Biology
BSB 509: Experimental Biochemistry
and Structural Biology
An introduction to modern biochemical
research techniques. The student spends a
half-semester in the laboratory of each of
four different members of the faculty. In
each laboratory, the student participates in
some aspect of the research being pursued
by the faculty member. Prerequisite: Must
be matriculated in BSB Graduate Program or
permission of instructor. Fall
1-9 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

36

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
BSB 510: Experimental Biochemistry
and Structural Biology
An introduction to modern biochemical
research techniques. The student spends a
half-semester in the laboratory of each of
four different members of the faculty. In
each laboratory, the student participates in
some aspect of the research being pursued
by the faculty member. Prerequisite: Must
be matriculated in BSB Graduate Program or
permission of instructor. Spring
1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BSB 512: Structural Biology and
Spectroscopy
Theoretical principles and experimental
methods used in the study of proteins and
nucleic acids, e.g., spectroscopy, magnetic
resonance and diffraction.
Prerequisites: MCB 520, or undergraduate
physical chemistry course, plus matriculation
in graduate program or permission of
instructor.
Fall, 2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
BSB 515: Computational Methods in
Biochemistry and Structural Biology
Computational methods used in sequence
searching and analysis, bioinformatics,
graphical analysis of proteins, and nucleic
acids. Prerequisite: This class is restricted to
first year BSB, HBM, MCB PHD, & HBH
PhD students. Exception requires approval
from the course instructor.

Spring 2021
determination, including sample preparation,
data collection and processing. In each of the
modules, students will be guided through a
complete structural determination project.
A final project report per module will be
required. Familiarity with Linux is desirable.
Students are encouraged to contact instructors
prior to enrolling. Crosslisted as BSB580 and
HBH585.
Spring, 0-4 credits, S/U grading
BSB 581: Teaching Honors
Selected students whose performance in
the basic required courses for the graduate
program is in the top 10 percent conduct
tutorials for first-year graduate students in the
program and other students taking graduate
courses for credit. The tutors are supervised
and graded by faculty of the graduate program.
Successful completion of this course makes
students eligible to receive "Honors in
Teaching" on their transcripts.
Fall and Spring, 1 credit, S/U grading
BSB 599: Research
Original investigation undertaken with the
supervision of a faculty member.
Prerequisite: Must be matriculated in BSB
Graduate Program or permission of instructor
Fall and Spring, 1-12 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

BSB 601: Colloquium in Biochemistry
and Structural Biology
A weekly series of talks and discussions by
Fall, 1 credit, S/U grading
visiting scientists covering current research
BSB 532: Journal Club in Biochemistry and thinking in various aspects of structural
biology and biochemistry.
and Structural Biology
Provides students with a forum for acquiring
skills involved in the critical analysis and
presentation of scientific data by active
participation in seminars of major topics in
structural biology and biochemistry, and
critical discussion of selected topics with
presentation of papers from the literature.
Prerequisite: Must be matriculated in BSB
Graduate Program or permission of instructor

Biology. Attendance is mandatory. Visitors are
welcome.
Prerequisite: Must be matriculated in BSB
Graduate Program or permission of instructor.
Fall and Spring, 1 credit, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
BSB 604: Student Seminars in
Biochemistry and Structural Biology
Seminars given by graduate students on
the progress of their own thesis research.
Required of all students every semester in
which they are registered in the Graduate
Program in Biochemistry and Structural
Biology. Attendance is mandatory. Visitors are
welcome.
Prerequisite: Must be matriculated in BSB
Graduate Program or permission of instructor.
Fall and Spring, 1 credit, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
BSB 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Original investigations undertaken as part
of the Ph.D. program under supervision of a
research committee.
Prerequisite: Advancement to candidacy (G5).
Major portion of research must take place on
SBU campus, or at the Brookhaven National
Laboratory.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.

BSB 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
Prerequisite: Must be matriculated in BSB
Graduate Program or permission of instructor. or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
Fall, 0-1 credits, S/U grading
are considered on-campus. All international
May be repeated for credit.
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
BSB 602: Colloquium in Biochemistry
by an International Advisor.
and Structural Biology
Prerequisite: Must be matriculated in BSB
Graduate Program or permission of instructor
Fall, Spring, 0-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

A weekly series of talks and discussions by
visiting scientists covering current research
and thinking in various aspects of structural
biology and biochemistry.

BSB 580: Advanced Structural Biology/
Structural Methods in Drug Discovery
This course is designed for students that want
to gain theoretical and practical experience
in macromolecular structure determination
through NMR spectroscopy and/or X-ray
crystallography. The course is organized
into two modules: NMR spectroscopy and
X-ray crystallography. Students may elect
to take one or both modules. Emphasis will
be placed on practical aspects of structural

Prerequisite: Must be matriculated in BSB
BSB 701: Dissertation Research off
Graduate Program or permission of instructor.
Campus - International
Spring, 0-1 credits, S/U grading
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
May be repeated for credit.
(G5). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or
BSB 603: Student Seminars in
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
Biochemistry and Structural Biology
option of the health plan and may also enroll
Seminars given by graduate students on
in MEDEX. International students who are
the progress of their own thesis research.
in their home country are not covered by
Required of all students every semester in
mandatory health plan and must contact the
which they are registered in the Graduate
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
Program in Biochemistry and Structural

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

37

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.

Spring 2021
relevant institutions, enforcement regimes,
etc., but also normative and ethical questions.
The course will rely heavily on current affairs
and case studies drawn from the headlines.
Although the course will focus predominantly
on international regimes and U.S. laws and
policies, we will, when appropriate, compare
U.S. legal regimes and policies to those in
other countries.

CAR
Career Development

CAR 510: Career Planning
This course provides graduate students with indepth examination of the essential components
Prerequisite: Must be matriculated in BSB
of the career development process, including
Graduate Program or permission of instructor
contemporary theories of career decision
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
making, job market intelligence, networking,
May be repeated for credit.
and professional branding. Students will
BUS 554: The Lean Launch Pad:
learn about the career readiness competencies
BSB 800: SUMMER RESEARCH
Turning a great idea into a great
employers require, and refine their leadership
company
Prerequisite: Must be matriculated in BSB
skills through a semester-long experiential
Graduate Program or permission of instructor
This course provides real world, hands-on
mentoring project. By the end of the course
learning of what it's like to actually start a
S/U grading
students will have a professional portfolio to
high-tech
company.
This
class
is
not
about
May be repeated for credit.
how to write a business plan, and the end result showcase their abilities and accomplishments.
0-1 credits,
is not a PowerPoint presentation to venture
capitalists. Instead, students will get their
hands dirty talking to customers, partners
Business Management
and competitors as they encounter the chaos
and uncertianty of how a startup actually
Chemistry
BUS 510: Biotechnology Startups and works. Students work in teams learning how
Operations
to turn a great idea into a great company.
CHE 501: Instrumental Methods in
A startup is not a smaller version of a large
They will learn how to use a business model
Chemistry
biotech company. Instead, it is a team testing
to brainstorm each part of a company and
Practical and theoretical aspects of
a business plan for viability. In this course,
customer development to get out of the
instrumentation in chemistry. The primary
students will learn about the operational side of classroom to see whether anyone other than
emphasis is on contemporary methods of
a biotech startup, with particular focus on the
themselves would want/use their product.
molecular structure determination such as Xfirst steps an entrepreneur must take through
Finally, they will see how agile development
ray crystallography, NMR, IR, and MS. Other
to the initiation of a Phase I clinical trial. The
can help them rapidly iterate their product to
topics may also be presented.
goal of this course is not to gain expertise in all build something customers will use and buy.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
areas; rather students will be familiar with all
Offered in Fall and Spring.
etc.)
of the varied topics a startup must consider and 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
be better prepared to work holistically within a
startup environment. Future CEOs will have a BUS 567: Intellectual Property Strategy CHE 502: Mechanisms and Strategies
in Organic Synthesis
better understanding of the myriad topics they Concepts and techniques of strategic
This course will focus on (1) the meaning
must form a team to address, patent attorneys
management are examined and applied to
and practice of writing organic reaction
will understand regulatory needs, and clinical
relevant cases involving the management
mechanisms and (2) standard synthetic
trial coordinators will recognize the needs
of intellectual property as applied to a wide
reactions, their mechanisms, and modern
of the marketing department. For additional
range of industries and innovations. From
refinements. Examples and applications
information on evaluating technologies and
targeted genomic medications based on
will be presented. The course will also
marketing strategies, students are encouraged
new nanotechnologies to the Harry Potter
discuss biomimetic syntheses and the use of
to take BME-511 and BME-512 as part of
series, the monetization of the creative output
mechanism in designing total syntheses.
the Bio-Based Entrepreneurship Advanced
of scientists, artists, designers, writers,
Graduate Certificate (BBE-AGC).
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
publishers, product designers, directors and
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
so on all involve the use of one or more forms
CHE 503: Synthetic Organic Chemistry
of intellectual property. The course will
BUS 520: Law and Foreign Policy in
A survey of the most important organic
begin with a brief overview/review of some
International Business
principals of management strategy. There will reactions from the viewpoint of synthetic
utility, including many recent innovations in
Law and Foreign Policy in International
then be a survey of the types of intellectual
this field. Throughout the discussion of these
Business is designed to provide MBA
property, and some of the laws that support
methods, emphasis is placed upon their use in
candidates with an appreciation for the legal
exclusivity in intellectual property rights.
the synthesis of complex organic structures.
regimes and foreign policy issues affecting
Students will explore the use and importance
international business in the 21st Century.
of intellectual property rights by companies
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
The course is designed for non-lawyers, and
and individual innovators in building and
etc.)
does not require any previous legal training or sustaining a competitive advantage, as well
familiarity with legal concepts. For each topic, as strategies used to realize the highest value
CHE 504: Structure and Reactivity in
students will consider not only descriptive
from intellectual property. Offered in Fall and Organic Chemistry
and practical considerations, such as the
Spring. 3 credits. Prerequisite - MBA 501.
Electronic and stereochemical theories relating
substance of a law, the mechanics of the
to organic structure and reactions. Topics such
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

BUS

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

CHE

38

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
as bonding, strain, aromaticity, MO theory,
molecular rearrangements, pericyclic reactions,
and photochemistry are covered. This course is
intended to provide a foundation of knowledge
at the beginning graduate level as preparation
for advanced subjects in CHE 502 and CHE
503, and is complementary to CHE 501.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring 2021
(iii) An overview of the important synthetic
methods for preparing solid state materials in
nanocrystalline, powder, thin film, and single
crystal form. (iv) A survey of the important
techniques for assessing the composition,
homogeneity, and crystallinity of materials
(such as SEM, TEM, AFM, STM), with an
emphasis on powder x-ray diffraction.

in electrochemistry, galvanostatic and
potentiostatic methods, the electrochemical
double layer, corrosion and passivation.
Relevant applications such as fuel cells,
batteries, and supercapacitors will be
discussed.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CHE 511: Structural Inorganic
Chemistry
Properties and reactions of inorganic
compounds are considered from the viewpoint
of molecular and electronic structure. The
modern bonding theories used in inorganic
chemistry including molecular orbital,
valence bond, and ligand field theories are
developed using symmetry and group theory.
Selected main group, transition metal, and
organometallic compounds are discussed. An
introduction to crystallography and solid-state
structure is included.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CHE 514: Transition Metal Chemistry
A survey course with an emphasis on the
transition metals. Reaction mechanisms,
synthesis, and structure are covered. Specific
areas of concern include coordination
chemistry, organometallic chemistry,
bioinorganic chemistry, and selected topics
from solid-state and non-transition metal
chemistry.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
CHE 515: Advanced Inorganic
Chemistry
A topical course with an emphasis on the
current literature. Subject matter varies and
is announced in advance. Possible subjects
include reaction mechanisms, organometallic
chemistry, bioinorganic chemistry, and
physical inorganic chemistry. May be repeated
as the subject matter varies.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CHE 516: Solid-State Chemistry
This course will provide an introduction to
structure and bonding in solid materials. This
class will survey the important structural
classes of periodic solids and will discuss
space groups and the crystallographic
symmetry elements important to these
materials. Topics that will be covered
may include, but are not limited to: (i)
The mechanisms by which crystals grow
and common types of defects. (ii) An
introduction to the basics of band theory.

CHE 517: Structural Chemistry
Much of chemistry is concerned with the
properties of atoms and molecules that are too
small to see directly. This course will cover a
variety of advanced techniques for elucidating
the atomic-scale structure of molecules
and periodic solids. A central technique is
diffraction, which probes periodic arrays.
The mathematical basis for diffraction will be
presented, followed by practical examples of
obtaining atomic coordinates from diffraction
data (powder and/or single crystal). Other
techniques that may be covered include the
analysis of local structure in partially ordered
or disordered solids (via techniques such
as PDF, EXAFS, small angle scattering,
or solid state NMR), and the basis of more
complex diffraction experiments (neutron/
electron diffraction, energy-dispersive/Laue
diffraction, and diffraction under extreme
pressure/temperature conditions).
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
CHE 518: Materials Chemistry
Our high technology world is driven
forward by advances in materials chemistry.
This class will discuss the origin of this
technology, covering the synthesis, structures,
and properties of advanced materials.
These materials will be studied from a
multidisciplinary perspective, since the
knowledge required for their development
spans more than one traditional academic
discipline. This class will focus on broad
topics with great current societal importance
(energy, computing, nanoscience, etc.), and
will discuss the materials at the heart of our
present technology as well as novel classes
of materials being developed for future
technology applications. Specific topics may
include batteries, fuel cells, catalysts, metallic
conductors, semiconductors, superconductors,
permanent magnets, magnetic films.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
CHE 519: Electrochemistry and
Electrochemical Materials Science
This course will survey electrochemistry and
electrochemical materials science. Topics
will include fundamental measurements

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

CHE 521: Quantum Chemistry I
Quantum theoretical concepts are discussed.
Schrodinger wave mechanics and related
mathematical techniques are illustrated by
treatment of systems of chemical interest.
Designed to form the theoretical basis for
the study of chemical bonding, molecular
structure, spectroscopy, and molecular
collision phenomena.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CHE 522: Molecular Spectroscopy
A detailed description of the theory and
practice of molecular spectroscopy. Topics
include the interaction of molecules with
electromagnetic radiation and the time
evolution of molecular energy states.
Prerequisite: CHE 521
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
CHE 523: Chemical Thermodynamics
A rigorous development of the fundamentals
of thermodynamics and its application to a
number of systems of interest to chemists,
such as electrochemical cells, gases, and
homogeneous and heterogeneous equilibrium.
An introduction to statistical mechanics will
also be included.
Fall, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
CHE 524: Magnetic Resonance
This course provides an introduction to the
fundamental quantum mechanics of the
magnetism of spin-1/2 (and higher) particles.
It includes a study of the Bloch equations (the
responses of the magnetism to continuouswave and pulsed irradiation) and a discussion
of the experimental hardware and techniques
commonly employed. Topics covered include
the basics of the spin Hamiltonian (chemical
shifts, J, dipolar, and quadrupolar couplings),
dynamics and relaxation 1-D spectroscopy
(spin and chemical exchange, lineshapes, spin
echos, etc.), 2-D spectroscopy (homonuclear
and heteronuclear correlation), techniques
for studies of solids and liquid crystals
(magic angle spinning, cross polarization,
quadrupolar echo), and the principles of
magnetic resonance imaging. Applications to

39

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
the biological and material sciences, as well as
chemical problems, will be discussed.
Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CHE 525: Theoretical Chemistry
This course stresses the physical theory
underlying chemical phenomena. Special
emphasis is given to advanced topics in
electronic structure theory, molecular
dynamics, condensed matter and surfaces,
many-body and quantum ensemble theory, and
the interaction of light and molecules.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CHE 528: Statistical Mechanics
Statistical theory of equilibrium systems and
rate processes. Ensemble theory, spatial and
time correlation functions. Model systems
and methods of estimating their properties.
Designed to enable the student to use the
current literature dealing with application of
statistical mechanics to problems in chemistry.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
CHE 530: Physical Chemistry of
Macromolecules
An investigation of the gross and fine
structures of macromolecules and
molecular aggregates in solution as
revealed by hydrodynamic behavior (e.g.,
ultracentrifugation, viscosity), light scattering,
spectroscopic properties (e.g., ultraviolet
hypochromism, circular dichromism, Raman,
fluorescence, magnetic resonance spectra), and
the thermodynamics and kinetics of interaction
with small molecules and ions. Theory of
conformation changes and phase transitions.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CHE 534: Computing in Chemistry
The basic elements of scripting, design of
computer programs, and numerical analysis are
discussed within the framework of solving a
variety of exciting problems chosen from all
areas of chemistry. Topics include automation
of repetitive tasks, fitting of data, numerical
integration of rate equations, signal and image
analysis, and quantum chemistry. No previous
knowledge of computer programming is
assumed.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CHE 535: Introduction to
Computational Structural Biology and
Drug Design
This course will provide an introduction
to Computational Structural Biology with
application to Drug Design. Methods and
applications that use computation to model

Spring 2021
biological systems involved in human disease
will be emphasized. The course aims to foster
collaborative learning and will consist of
presentations by the instructor, guest lecturers,
and by course participants with the goal of
summarizing key methods, topics, and papers
relevant to Computational Structural Biology.
Fall, 0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
CHE 536: Molecular Modeling of
Biological Bolecules
This course is designed for students who
wish to gain hands-on experience modeling
biological molecules at the atomic level. In
conjunction with the individual interests,
Molecular Mechanics, Molecular Dynamics,
Monte Carlo, Docking (virtual screening),
or Quantum Mechanics software packages
can be used to study relevant biological
system(s). Projects will include setup,
execution, and analysis. Course participants
will give literature presentations relevant to
the simulations being performed and a final
project report will be required. Familiarity with
UNIX (Linux) is desirable.
Prerequisite: CHE 535 or permission of
instructor
Spring, 0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
CHE 541: Biomolecular Structure and
Analysis
The structures of biological macromolecules
and the relationship of their structure
to biological function are described.
Methodology employed to study
macromolecules is also discussed. Topics
include chemical and physical properties
of cell and tissue constituents, including
carbohydrates, lipids, nucleic acids, proteins
and peptides. Prerequisite: Strong foundation
in physical and organic chemistry.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CHE 542: Chemical Biology
The reactivity and physiological function of
biological macromolecules and their cofactors
are described at the chemical biochemical
level. The emphasis of this course reflects
recent advances in chemical biology. Possible
topics include catalysts, reaction mechanisms,
correlation between three-dimensional
structure and reactivity, receptor-ligand
interactions in extracellular and intracellular
signaling, protein folding in vitro and in vivo.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
CHE 543: Chemical Approaches to
Biology

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

The use of molecular concepts and
methodology to solve problems in biology
and medicine. The course covers methods
to elucidate and control biological systems.
Possible topics include chemical genomics,
metabolomics, and chemotherapeutics.
Prerequisite CHE 542
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CHE 558: Physical Biology
This is a course on the principles of physical
chemistry. We describe the nature of the forces
and energies and entropies that drive molecular
systems toward their states of equilibrium.
We consider a broad range of applications
throughout chemistry, biology, materials
engineering and nanoscience. This course aims
to give students an understanding of how the
actions and behaviors of materials arise from
their atomic and molecular structures. Colisted with PHY 558
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
CHE 559: Biological Dynamics and
Networks
This course will provide a solid foundation
in key theoretical concepts for the study of
dynamics in biological systems and networks
at different scales ranging from the molecular
level to metabolic and gene regulatory
networks. Topics of this course include
but are not limited to: Physical kinetics;
Diffusion/Smoluchowskii; Random flights;
Waiting times; Poisson; Brownian ratchets;
Chemical kinetics; Transition states; Stability,
bifurcations, pattern development; Noise
in cells: intrinsic and Extrinsic; Feedback;
Biological Osciillators; Recurrence, period
doubling, chaos; Networks; Topologies;
Degree distribution, betweenness; Models of
nets: Erdos-Renyi, scale-free, social, WattsStrogatz, agents; Robustness, highly-optimized
tolerance, bowties, epidemics; Biological
networks: Protein-protein nets, regulatory and
metabolic nets; Known biological circuits
and their behaviors; How networks evolve:
Preferential attachment, rewiring; Power
laws; Fluxed through networks; Information
and communication, entropy; Metabolic flux
analysis; Artificial and Natural selection
for traits; Darwinian evolution; Population
dynamics.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
CHE 581: Departmental Research
Seminar
Meetings in which first-year graduate students
learn about the research activities of the
departmental faculty.
40

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Fall, S/U grading

Spring 2021
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

CHE 582: Literature Seminar
Students select and discuss topics from the
current literature.

CHE 596: Teaching and Learning
Chemistry
The objective of CHE 596 is to better prepare
students for the kinds of interactions they
Spring, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
are likely to have in their careers when
communicating their chemistry. Specifically,
CHE 586: Professional Skills for
this course will help students to: (i) develop
Scientists
competency with research-based approaches
Development and refinement of the
to facilitating discourse that is generative
professional skills used by scientists: An
exploration of more sophisticated presentation for improving scientific understandings of
chemistry phenomena; (ii) recognize the
skills used in oral and poster presentations;
importance of representations in chemistry
incorporatyion of collaborative problem
and to incorporate a more explicit modeling
solving that mimics real world situations,
perspective and approach for developing
including simple proposal writing; exposure
scientific literacy; (iii) develop teaching
to professional societies and meetings; an
exploration of career options and employment strategies to effectively communicate abstract
and complex chemical concepts to advise
resources; tips for resume preparation and
expert and non-expert audiences; (iv) develop
interviews. Recommended for upper divsion
endergraduates and masters students. Winter, 2 curricular interventions aimed at improving
individual and community practice of
credits, ABCF Grading
challenging conceptual ideas; (v) incorporate
2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
historical and philosophical perspectives on
the development of fundamental chemical
CHE 588: Graduate Workshop
principles into the teaching of those topics
Additional problem solving and team learning in diverse settings; (vi) become aware
on topics from a concurrent formal graduate
of recent developments in the learning
course. Topics vary.
progressions literature to inform understanding
Fall and Spring, 0-1 credits, S/U grading
of appropriate curriculum planning and
May be repeated for credit.
implementation; and (vii) develop an identity
towards reflective practice and empowerment
CHE 589: Directed Study
of fellow chemistry educators into positions of
Subject matter varies according to needs of
leadership.
student.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Fall and Spring, 0-12 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CHE 590: M.S. Term Paper
Seminar leading to a term paper on a selected
topic in chemistry, chemical applications, or
chemical pedagogy.
Fall, Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B
+, etc.)
CHE 591: Chemistry of the
Environment
This course provides an overview of the
chemistry of environmental processes,
environmental degradation, remediation and
abatement processes, and energy production.
Past actions and current efforts of the chemical
enterprise in both exacerbating and addressing
anthropogenic environmental degradation are
discussed.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CHE 593: Chemical Demonstrations
The design and implementation of
demonstrations to illustrate modern concepts
of chemistry.

CHE 597: M.S. Research Thesis
Development
This course provides a structured environment
for students to develop their research project
into a written thesis. Students will receive
instruction and guidance in performing
literature research related to their project and
in developing this background material along
with their own research into a properly written
document.
3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
CHE 598: Professional Masters
Internship
Participation in private corporations, public
agencies, or non-profit institutions for research
and other experiential training activities related
to the completion of a Master term paper.
Students will be required to have a faculty
coordinator as well as a contact in the outside
organization, to participate with them in
regular consultations on the project, and to
successfully complete CHE 590. Prerequisites:
Permission of Master's Program Director. 0-12

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

credits, S/U grading May be repeated for credit
Offered
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 0-12 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.
CHE 599: Research
Fall, Spring, 1-12 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
CHE 602: Special Topics in Physical
Organic Chemistry
The subject matter varies depending on
interests of students and staff. It may cover
such areas as photochemistry, theoretical
organic chemistry, and the chemistry of
unstable intermediates; the emphasis is
on fundamental considerations and recent
developments.
1-12 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CHE 603: Special Topics in Bioorganic
Chemistry
The subject matter varies depending on
interests of students and faculty. Possible
topics include asymmetric synthesis and
natural product synthesis.
Fall, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CHE 606: Special Topics in Synthetic
Chemistry
May be repeated for credit.
CHE 607: Modern Drug Design &
Discovery
A seminar course covering modern aspects
and approaches to drug design. This course
combines presentations by faculty and by
industry representatives to provide a crossdisciplinary view of the development of
pharmaceuticals.
Fall, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
CHE 610: Practicum in Teaching
Practice instruction in chemistry at the
undergraduate level, carried out under faculty
orientation and supervision. A minimum of
two semesters of CHE 610 or 611 is required
of all candidates for graduate research degrees
in chemistry, unless explicitly waived by the
chairperson.
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CHE 611: Practicum in Teaching
41

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Practice instruction in chemistry at the
undergraduate level, carried out under faculty
orientation and supervision. A minimum of
two semesters of CHE 610 or 611 is required
of all candidates for graduate research degrees
in chemistry, unless explicitly waived by the
chairperson.

Spring 2021
Supervised curricular training in dissertationrelated research. Prerequisite: For full-time:
Summer session or advancement to candidacy;
Permission of Graduate Program Director.
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

Fall and Spring, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) CHE 693: Physical Chemistry Seminar
May be repeated for credit.
Fall and Spring, 0-12 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
CHE 619: Critical Readings of Current
Topics in Chemistry
CHE 694: Biological Chemistry
Recent research papers from the literature
Seminar
will be analyzed in depth. These papers may
Fall and Spring, 0-12 credits, S/U grading
originate from the inorganic, organic, physical,
May be repeated for credit.
and/or biochemical literature. The exact topic
of the course is announced in advance. Fall and CHE 695: Inorganic Chemistry Seminar
Spring
Fall and Spring, 0-12 credits, S/U grading
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
May be repeated for credit.
CHE 625: Molecular Structure and
Crystallography
Experimental methods in the determination of
molecular structure. The emphasis is on the
determination of structure in the solid state,
particularly by X-ray crystallography. Students
complete a single-crystal molecular structure
determination using modern diffractometer
techniques.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CHE 641: Organometallic Chemistry
A systematic presentation of the chemistry
of organometallic compounds, particularly
those of the transition metals. Topics include
structure, bonding, reaction mechanisms,
synthesis, and applications in catalysis and
organic synthesis.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CHE 682: Special Topics in Inorganic
Chemistry
Subject matter varies, depending on interests
of students and staff, but covers recent
developments in inorganic chemistry.
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CHE 683: Special Topics in Physical
Chemistry
Subject matter varies, depending on interests
of students and staff, but covers recent
developments and advanced topics in physical
chemistry.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CHE 690: Internship in DissertationRelated Research

Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
in MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.
All international students must received
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

CHE 696: Organic Chemistry Seminar

CHE 800: SUMMER RESEARCH

Fall and Spring, 0-12 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

May be repeated for credit.

CHE 697: Seminar in Physical and
Quantitative Biology
Fall and spring, 0-1 credits, S/U grading.
0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
CHE 698: Colloquium
Fall and Spring, 0-12 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
CHE 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research must take
place on SBU campus, at Cold Spring Harbor,
or at the Brookhaven National Lab.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.
CHE 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
CHE 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

CHI
Chinese Language
CHI 501: Advanced Chinese I
An advanced course in Chinese as a foreign
or heritage language to strengthen their ability
to understand, speak, read, and write Chinese
beyond the intermediate level. Students learn
to read and comprehend a variety of texts
from Chinese newspaper/magazine articles,
TV/films, and literary works and to write
creatively and professionally in Chinese
using sophisticated vocabulary and advanced
Chinese characters. Student will also be trained
to comprehend authentic spoken Mandarin
Chinese, using a variety of audio-visual
materials and to communication in Mandarin
Chinese, applying appropriate socio-cultural
norms.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CHI 502: Advanced Chinese II
The second part of an advanced course in
Chinese as a foreign or heritage language
to strengthen their ability to understand,
speak, read, and write Chinese beyond the
intermediate level. Students learn to read and
comprehend a variety of texts from Chinese
newspaper/magazine articles, TV/films, and
literary works and to write creatively and
professionally in Chinese using sophisticated
vocabulary and advanced Chinese characters.
Students will also be trained to comprehend
authentic spoken Mandarin Chinese, using
a variety of audio-visual materials and to
communicate in Mandarin Chinese, applying
42

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
appropriate socio-cultural norms. This course
is not intended for students who already speak
Chinese natively.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CHI 526: Structure of Mandarin
Chinese
Mandarin Chinese is only one of a very few
contemporary languages whose history is
documented in an unbroken tradition extending
back to the second millennium BC. At the
same time, it has more speakers than any
other language spoken in the modern world.
This course provides an introduction to the
phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics,
and writing system of the Mandarin Chinese
language. It is designed to familiarize students
with some fundamental knowledge of the
structure of spoken and written Mandarin
Chinese. Specifically, it aims to enable the
students to acquire an understanding of basic
methods used by linguists to observe and
gather Mandarin Chinese data, to delineate
stmctural prope1ties with regard to the sound,
tone, word, grammar, and discourse of the
language, and to develop a basic typological
comparison between Mandarin Chinese and
English.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

CIV
Civil Engineering
CIV 505: Transportation Network
Analysis
Traffic flows on networks; Deterministic and
user equilibrium traffic assignment problems;
Transportation networks and optimality;
Transportation network design and reliability;
Vulnerability of transportation networks
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CIV 507: Transportation Economics
Microeconomics principles applied in the
transportation field. Transportation demand
and supply. Transportation costs (fixed
costs, variable costs) and externalities.
Economic and social benefits of transportation.
Economic principles for transport pricing ,
e.g. toll pricing. Cost benefit analysis of a
transportation project. History of government
regulation of transportation.

Spring 2021
and operation. Emphasis will be placed on the
development of models to demonstrate the
core concepts involved in network distribution
strategies, discrete facility location design,
vehicle routing and scheduling, and inventory
management.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CIV 510: Advanced Foundation
Engineering
The course is designed to provide students
with the theory and experience-based
knowledge necessary to evaluate and estimate
soil properties and earth pressure for analysis
and design of retaining walls, anchored
bulkheads, and excavation bracing systems.
Bearing capacity and settlement of shallow
foundations are also covered. Semesters
Offered: Fall
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

technique for a given project and deliver a
detailed design of the selected technique.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CIV 522: Introduction to Coastal
Engineering
Basic hydrodynamics of water waves. Topics
include linear wave theory, energy, power
and energy propagation, wave refraction,
shoaling and breaking in the nearshore,
diffraction by breakwaters and gaps, reflection
and basin oscillations, wave statistics and
spectra, wind-wave hindcast/forecast, wave
forces on piles and pipes. Some coastal
processes due to nonlinearity, including
wave set-up/set-down, nearshore circulations
and storm surges. Physical interpretations
of mathematical formulas are particularly
emphasized. Semesters Offered: Spring
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.

CIV 511: Advanced Shear Strength of
Soils
This course covers topics related to advanced
analysis for shear strength of soils including
stress-path, shear strength of cohesive soils,
and shear strength of granular soils.

CIV 523: Coastal Engineering Planning
and Design
The basic principles involved in the planning
and design of various types and functions
of coastal structures and shore protective
measures will be discussed. Topics will
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
include review of linear wave theory,
considerations of site conditions; design
CIV 513: Seepage and Slope Stability
This class will expose students to water flow in processes; design of sloping- and verticalsoils and the associated seepage forces applied front costal structures; scour and scour
protection; coastal sediment transport; shore
on underground structures. Also included
protection measures such as coastal armoring,
in this class is a detailed discussion about
beach restoration, and beach stabilization; and
determining the soil hydraulic properties
introduction to harbor and marina.
in the lab and in the field. Additionally, the
course will discuss the stability of earth slopes 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
forming natural and manmade slopes using
CIV 524: Coastal Processes and
various analysis methods.
Sediment Transport
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
This course describes processes associated
CIV 515: Analysis of Deep Foundations with water and sediment movements close to
shoreline. The topics covered in this course
This course covers topics related to the
includes: sediment characteristics; long-term
analysis and design of deep foundations
processes, hydrodynamics of coastal zone;
including the design of vertically loaded
field measurement techniques and analysis,
drilled shafts and driven piles, the analysis
equilibrium beach profiles, sediment transport,
of laterally loaded piles, and in-situ pile load
modeling of beaches and shorelines, shoreline
tests.
modification and analysis including soft and
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
hard engineering approaches and tidal inlets.

CIV 516: Soil and Site Improvement
This class will expose students to techniques
currently used in practice to improve the
properties of soils in-situ. These techniques
will include shallow and deep compaction,
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
overexcavation and replacement, deep
replacement, drainage and dewatering,
CIV 509: Transportation Logistics
preloading, deep soil mixing, and fill
Systems
reinforcement. At the end of the class, students
This course provides a deep understanding of
will be able to perform preliminary analysis to
logistics systems by introducing the models
and analytic techniques to evaluate their design select the most appropriate soil improvement
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CIV 526: Environmental Biotechnology
This graduate course covers the fundamental
concepts of biological processes that
are important in natural and engineered
environmental systems. The course will
incorporate basic fundamental microbiology
into a quantifiable engineering context in order
to describe, predict and control behavior of
environmental biological system.
43

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CIV 530: Structural Mechanics
This course deals with fundamentals of
the theory of structures with the objective
of providing proper understanding and
knowledge on structural analysis methods
and structural behavior. The subject treatment
is in the context of truss, beam, frame, and
plate structural elements. A key objective is to
provide the necessary knowledge and skills for
capturing structural behavior through simple
models. The course will extend concepts in
matrix structural analysis by presenting a
general framework for analyzing complex
structural systems. A brief introduction to the
finite element method and nonlinear structural
analysis is provided.

Spring 2021
assessment; comprehensive source-to-design
actions project.

and sediment contamination, and even some
applications to biological systems.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

CIV 544: Environmental Fluid
Dynamics
Free surface flows of water and air occurring
in natural fluid systems and influencing
environmental transport and mixing.
Fundamental principles of fluids, covering the
scales relevant to both engineering and geophysical applications. Topics include waves,
instability, stratification, turbulent boundary
layers, jets and plumes, and river hydraulics
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

CIV 545: Computational Fluid
Dynamics
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Computational methods in hydraulics and
coastal engineering, Incompressible flows,
CIV 532: Structural Dynamics
Turbulence modeling, Coupled hydrodynamics
Analysis of the dynamic response of structures and Morphodynamics, Computational methods
and structural components to transient loads
for modeling contaminant transport, Numerical
and foundation excitation; single-degree-ofalgorithms for solving Navier-Stokes
freedom and multi-degree-of-freedom systems; equations, Introducing parallel programing and
response spectrum concepts; numerical
high-performance computing in computational
methods for integration of the equations of
fluid dynamics.
motion; simple inelastic structural systems;
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
systems with distributed mass and flexibility.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CIV 533: Intermediate Steel Design
Metal members under combined loads;
connections, welded and bolted; momentresistant connections; plate girders,
conventional behavior, and tension field
action.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CIV 534: Intermediate Reinforced
Concrete Design
Strength, behavior, and design of
indeterminate reinforced concrete structures,
with primary emphasis on slab systems;
emphasis on the strength of slabs and on the
available methods of design of slabs spanning
in two directions, with or without supporting
beams.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CIV 535: Earthquake Engineering
Source mechanisms, stress waves, and site
response of earthquake shaking; effect on
the built environment; nature of earthquake
actions on structures; fundamental structural
response characteristics of stiffness, strength,
and ductility; representation of the earthquake
input in static and dynamic structural analysis;
modeling of steel and concrete structures
under earthquake effects; outputs for safety

CIV 546: Environmental Aquatic
Chemistry
This course introduces the application of
physical chemistry to solve problems related
to natural water systems (both freshwater
and seawater) and anthropogenic impacts on
these systems. We will cover thermodynamics
and kinetics and how they can be used to
understand the distribution and cycling
of chemical species in natural waters and
related processes, including dissolution and
precipitation, oxidation and reduction, acidbase interactions, and complexation. We will
also cover special topics related to current
issues in water quality.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CIV 547: Enviromental PyhsicalChemical Processes
Physical-chemical processes that affect
environmental quality in natural and
engineered systems. The focus is on
developing a qualitative understanding of
mechanisms as well as quantitative tools
to describe, predict, and control physicalchemical processes. Topics include reactor
mixing and reaction kinetics, gas transfer,
sorption, particle dynamics, filtration,
membranes, and disinfection. Most of the
applications are in the water quality subdomain, but overlap exists with air quality, soil

CIV 548: Organic Pollutants in
Environmental Systems
This course covers topics in theoretical and
applied environmental organic chemistry. We
will focus on physical/chemical properties
of organic pollutants and the processes that
govern their fate and transport, particularly
in air and water, as well as their interactions
with soil and biota. Topics include equilibrium
partitioning, molecular diffusion, airwater exchange, sorption, bioaccumulation
and biomagnification, and transformation
reactions. We will also touch on emerging
issues involving novel organic contaminants.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CIV 551: Sensing and Learning for
Smart Cities
An introductory course on practical
applications and challenges of sensing, data
analytics and machine learning in the context
of physical urban systems. Background is
provided on data analysis and associated
challenges specific to smart cities applications,
insights behind signal representation, statistical
modeling, and machine learning, and critical
interpretation of outcomes. The course is
suitable for students without prior experience
in probabilistic and statistical modeling,
or working with data. Topics include data
visualization, noise cleansing, frequency
domain analysis, forward and inverse
modeling, feature extraction, sampling bias,
statistical modeling, machine learning, and
error analysis.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CIV 595: Independent Study in Civil
Engineering
Students can register this course in order to
conduct research or participate in a project
under the supervision of one or more members
of the Civil Engineering faculty.
1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
CIV 596: MS Project
This course is taken by M.S. students who
select MS Project track. Conducted jointly by
graduate students and one or more members
of the faculty. A final project report must
be submitted to the advisor as well as to the
Graduate Program Director. Without the
submitted report, credits from his course
cannot be applied toward the MS degree.
0-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

44

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
May be repeated for credit.
CIV 599: M.S. Thesis Research
This course is taken by M.S. students for their
thesis research work.
1-12 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
CIV 680: Special Topics in
Transportation Engineering
The subject matter of special topics course can
vary semester to semester depending on the
interests of the students and the faculty, and
the contemporary topics in transportation field
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CIV 681: Special Topics In
Geomechanics and Geotechnical
Engineering
The subject matter of special topics course
can vary semester to semester depending on
the interests of the sudetns and the faculty,
and the contemporary topics in geotechnical
engineering field.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CIV 682: Special Topics in Ocean and
Coastal Engineering
The course is designed for the discussion of
topics of special interest on demand that may
not be covered in regularly scheduled courses.
Varying topics from ocean wave mechanics,
offshore structures, coastal processes,
sediments and morphology to estuarine
dynamics may be offered concurrently.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CIV 683: Special Topics in Structural
Engineering
The subject matter of special topics course
can vary semester to semester depending on
the interests of the students and the faculty,
and the contemporary topics in structural
engineering field.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CIV 684: Special Topics in Water
Resources and Environmental
Engineering
The course is designed for the discussion of
topics of special interest on demand that may
not be covered in regularly scheduled courses.
Varying topics from water treatment, solid
waste management, urban and watershed
hydrology, stormwater management, water
quality modeling to environmental fluid
mechanics may be offered concurrently.

Spring 2021
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CIV 685: Special Topics in Materials
Engineering
The subject matter of special topics course
can vary semester to semester depending on
the interests of the students and the faculty,
and the contemporary topics in materials
engineering field.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CIV 691: Civil Engineering Seminar
This course is designed to expose students
to cutting-edge research and development
activities in civil engineering. Speakers are
invited from both on and off campus. Fall
and spring. 0 credits, S/U grading. May be
repeated.
S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
CIV 695: Civil Engineering Internship
Participation in off-campus engineering
practice in private corporations, public
agencies, or non-profit institutions. Student
will be required to have faculty coordinator as
well as a contact in outside organizations, to
participate with them in regular consultations
on the project, and to submit a final report to
both. A maximum of 3 credits can be accepted
toward the M.S. degree.
1 credit, S/U grading
May be repeated 3 times FOR credit.
CIV 697: Practicum in Teaching I
Every TA must register for this course
Fall, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

take place off-campus, but in the United
States and/or U.S. provinces. All international
students must enroll in one the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an international advisor.
1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
CIV 701: Dissertation Research Off
Campus-International
Major Portion of research will take place
outside of the United States and/or U.S.
provinces. Domestic students have the option
of the health plan and may also enroll in
MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable. All international students
must receive clearance for an International
Advisor
1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

CLT
Comparative Literature
CLT 501: Theories of Comparative
Literature
This course provides a survey of literacy
theory and its role in the formation of
comparative literature as a discipline.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

CIV 698: Practicum in Teaching II
Practicum in teaching under faculty
supervision 3 credits, S/U grading

CLT 509: History of Literary Criticism
A history of literary theory from classical
Greece to Freud. Offered Fall/

3 credits, S/U grading

Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

CIV 699: Dissertation Research On
Campus
Students have to register for this class during
their dissertation research after advancement to
candidacy. Major portion of research must take
place on SBU campus, at Cold Spring Harbor,
or at the Brookhaven National Lab.
0-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
CIV 700: Dissertation Research Off
Campus-Domestic
Students have to register for this class during
their dissertation research after advancement
to candidacy. Major portion of research will

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

CLT 597: Directed Readings for M.A.
Students
A student and faculty member agree on a
corpus of texts to read and discuss at weekly
or biweekly meetings. The reading list must be
filed with the program's form before the add/
drop period ends. May be repeated for credit.
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
CLT 598: Thesis Research
Research and writing of M.A. thesis
supervised by faculty advisor.
45

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Offered Fall, Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
CLT 599: Independent Study
A student and faculty member agree on a topic
not offered in any seminars and a reading
list to study at weekly or biweekly meetings.
A final research paper or major annotated
bibliography will be required. The syllabus
must be filed with the program's form before
the add/drop period ends. May be repeated for
credit.

Spring 2021
West," and "European Realisms." Offered Fall
and Spring 3 Credits, ABCF Grading

The practicum is required of all students
during their first year.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.

CLT 608: Cross-Cultural Perspectives
Key topics in genre, literary criticism,
and methodology from a cross-cultural
perspective. Emphasis will be placed on
an examination of differences as well as
similarities. Presuppositions of specific literary
traditions will be questioned within the broader
Only three credits of Independent Study can be perspectives of philosophical and religious
valences.
counted toward the M.A. requirements, and a
maximum of six toward the Ph.D
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
CLT 609: Advanced Topics in
May be repeated for credit.
Comparative Literature
A variable topics seminar in Comparative
CLT 600: Seminar in Stylistics
Literature. 3 credits, Letter graded (A,A-,B+,
Changing topics in the study of stylistic and
etc.) Course may be repeated as topics vary.
structural elements of the literary text.
Semesters Offered: Fall and Spring
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
May be repeated for credit.
CLT 601: Seminar in Literary and
Cultural Theory
Changing topics in the specialized
examinations of recent or historical trends
such as semiotics, Marxism, reader-response,
psychoanalysis, hermeneutics, deconstruction.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CLT 602: Interdisciplinary Seminar
Specific problems in the relations between
literature and other disciplines.

CLT 680: Cultural Studies Research
Seminar
In addition to readings on issues, debates, and
problems within the profession and field of
Cultural Studies students will develop research
for publication while engaging with practices
of professionalization.
Offered Fall/
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.

CLT 690: Directed Readings for
Doctoral Candidates
A student and faculty member agree on a
CLT 603: Comparative Studies in
corpus of texts to read and discuss at weekly
Literary History
or biweekly meetings. The reading list must be
Changing topics in the study of literary periods filed with the program's form before the add/
drop period ends. May be repeated for credit.
and styles.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Fall and Spring, 1-12 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

CLT 604: Comparative Studies in
Genre
Changing topics in the study of the history and
theory of literary genres.

CLT 696: Self-Directed Readings
For doctoral students who have completed
all course requirements and wish to dedicate
themselves to full or part-time preparation for
the Comprehensive Examination.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CLT 607: Major Authors in
Comparative Context
Critical and comparative examination of two
or more major figures from different literary or
other aesthetic traditions. Recent topics have
included "Kristeveva," Dostoevsky and the

CLT 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Prerequisite: Advancement to candidacy (G5).
A portion of dissertation research must take
place on SBU campus.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.
CLT 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
CLT 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
in MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.
All international students must received
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
CLT 800: SUMMER RESEARCH

Fall and Spring, 3-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated 6 times FOR credit.

May be repeated for credit.

CLT 698: Practicum in Teaching
The course is divided into two parts: one half
is normally given in the fall, one in the spring.
The first part deals primarily with matters of
pedagogy. The second part is designed to help
students plan their own undergraduate courses.

May be repeated for credit.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

CLT 850: SUMMER TEACHING

CME
46

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Chemical and Molecular
Engineering
CME 501: Fluid Mechanics
This course aims to provide graduate-level
students with fundamental concepts of fluid
mechanics; mass, energy and momentum
balances; fluids flow in pipes; Couette flows,
Poiseuille flows, unsteady flows; viscous flow;
fluid flow in porous media; laminar boundary
layer and other unidirectional flow; turbulent
flow; fluctuations and time-averaging, two
phase flow and fluidization; non-Newtonian
fluids; microfluidics and electro-kinetic flow
effects; compressible flows and computational
fluid dynamics.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CME 502: Mathematical Analysis &
Modeling
This course aims to provide graduatelevel students with a practical approach to
computational methods for the development
of various modeling approaches to a variety of
relevant chemical, physical and engineering
processes. The course will cover linear
algebra, nonlinear algebraic systems, matrix
eigenvalue analysis, initial value problems
numerical optimization, boundary value
problems; probability theory and stochastic
simulations, Bayesian statistics and parameter
estimation and Fourier analysis.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CME 503: Chemical Engineering
Thermodynamics
This course aims to provide graduatelevel students with understanding on
the equilibrium thermodynamics and
classical statistical thermodynamics,
and to apply them to analyze chemical
engineering problems down to molecularscale. It contains mainly the following
subjects: Fundamentals of Equilibrium
Thermodynamics; Thermodynamic Properties
of Fluids and Fluid Mixtures; Phase Transition
and Critical Phenomena; Classical Statistical
Mechanics; Statistical Thermodynamics of
Ideal Gases and Liquid Mixtures; and Other
Topics of Interest.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CME 504: Chemical Reaction
Engineering
Introduce the students to the fundamental
principles of reaction engineering in order to
enable them to handle kinetics and kinetictransport interactions in a variety of situations.
To introduce students to the analysis of the
kinetics of homogeneous chemical reactions.
To apply this analysis and the concepts of

Spring 2021
material and energy conservation to the design
of idealized homogeneous chemical reactors
operating both in batch and continuous
modes and under both isothermally and nonisothermally conditions. To introduce the
analysis of non ideal flow and, using the flow
model, to quantify its effect on an idealized
reactor design.

derivation of stress and relaxation modulus,
discussion on the relaxation behavior, the
deGennes reptation model, and contour length
fluctuation in polymer chains. In addition to
the text, the student will be exposed to classic
and current literature in the field.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

CME 514: Characterization Methods
(Microscopy and Spectroscopy)
CME 511: Transport Phenomena
This course aims to provide graduate-level
This course covers topics in advanced
students with an in-depth acquaintance
transport phenomena. Topics include,
with important characterization methods
equations of change for isothermal systems,
that are applicable to surface science, soft
viscosity, momentum transport, laminar
materials, thin films and nanotechnology.
and creeping flow, multi-variable velocity
Topics include techniques such as atomic
potential, turbulent flow, Interphase transport, force microscopy (AFM) including contactfriction factors, rheology of polymeric liquids, mode, tapping-mode and lateral-force AFM,
non-Newtonian viscosity and generalized
scanning tunneling microscopy (STM),
Newtonian models, equations of change
electrostatic force microscopy (EFM),
for non-isothermal systems, temperature
magnetic force microscopy (MFM), AFMdistributions and unsteady heat conduction in
based nano-lithography, surface force and
solids, temperature distributions in turbulent
adhesion measurement, as well as molecular
flow and heat flux, diffusivity and mass
recognition, Xray photon spectroscopy (XPS)
transport, mass and molar transport by
and ultraviolet photon spectroscopy (UPS),
convection.
including basic principle, instrumentation
configuration, data interpretation and analysis,
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
chemical shift, quantification, and depthprofiling; time-of-flight secondary ion mass
CME 512: Non-equilibrium
spectrometry (ToF-SIMS), Fourier-transform
Thermodynamics
infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and Raman
This course provides in depth graduate level
instruction in non-equilibrium thermodynamics spectroscopy, attenuated total reflection
(ATR), diffuse reflectance, and polarization
and statistical mechanics. Topics include a
modulation-infrared reflection-adsorption
qualitative comparison of equilibrium and
spectroscopy (PM-IRRAS) and finally,
non-equilibrium systems, the description
scanning and transmission electron microscopy
of thermodynamic ensembles, the concept
(SEM and TEM). In addition to the text, the
of system fluctuations, Brownian motion,
student will be exposed to classic and current
fluctuation-dissipation processes, Markov
literature in the field.
processes, Chapman-Kolmogorov equation,
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
the Fokker-Planck equation, the EinsteinSmoluchowski equation, stochastic processes
CME 515: Complex Fluids
and boundary conditions, auto-catalytic
chemical reactions, bistability, transport
This course aims to provide graduate-level
processes, relaxation time approximation,
students with a unified approach to complex
stability of far-from equilibrium systems;
fluids. Complex fluids, also referred to as
pattern formation and self-assembly.
soft materials, are materials which have the
capability to self-organize to form complex
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
structures that may be manipulated to exhibit
a variety of properties essential for specific
CME 513: Rheology
functional requirements. The materials
This course aims to provide graduate-level
considered under this definition are the various
students with an in-depth acquaintance with
classes of colloids, polymers, amphiphiles,
important topics in rheology. Topics include
a discussion of the role of rheology in science liquid crystals and biological molecules.
and engineering, the definition of viscosity, the Topics covered include an overview and
classification of various types of viscous fluids definitions of soft matter and complex
fluids; Intermolecular interactions; Phase
and flows, deformation and stress, relaxation
transitions and order parameters, scaling
functions, relaxation time, conversion among
laws and polydispersity; Polymer systems,
response functions, complex modulus, glass
transition, time-temperature superposition rule, thermodynamics of polymer solutions;
WLF equation; stress expression in polymers, Polymers at interfaces, adsorbed polymer
layers, polymer brushes; self-assembly in
tension, free-energy and distribution-function
bulk, weak and strong segregation, microphase
of subchains, the Rouse and Zimm models,
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

47

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
separation; Self-assembly in solution,
polymeric micelles, surfactant micelles,
planar assemblies, microemulsions; Colloidal
systems, forces, and stability, interaction
between charged surfaces, colloidal dynamics,
diffusion and sedimentation; Amphiphilic
systems, surface activity, surfactants and
monolayers, membranes; Liquid crystals,
applications in microelectronics; Biological
systems; Macromolecular and supramolecular
assemblies.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CME 519: Electrochemistry and
Electrochemical Materials Science
This course will survey electrochemistry and
electrochemical materials science. Topics
will include fundamental measurements
in electrochemistry, galvanostatic and
potentiostatic methods, the electrochemical
double layer, corrosion and passivation.
Relevant applications such as fuel cells,
batteries, and supercapacitors will be
discussed.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CME 522: Heterogeneous Catalysis &
Surface Reaction
Heterogeneous catalysis is central to the
petroleum chemical industry and it is
directly related to products efficiency. This
course will emphasize the fundamental and
application of heterogeneous catalysis and
introduce the catalytic reaction mechanism.
Students who complete the course will have
attained the following outcomes: 1) Basic
of heterogeneous catalyst and catalysis 2)
Kinetics of heterogeneously catalyzed reaction
3) Surface characterization by spectroscopic
techniques 4) Knowledge of supported metal
oxide and zeolites 5) Application of theoretical
calculations 6) Industrial applications of
heterogeneous catalyst.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CME 523: Nanocomposites
This course aims to provide graduate-level
students with an in-depth knowledge of the
main types of nanocomposite materials and
their specific physical and chemical properties
required in applications. Topics include a
discussion of the methods of preparation and
characterization of specific physical properties
of nanocomposite materials. The current state
of theory and modeling of nanocomposites
will be presented. At the end of the course,
students will have enough understanding of
the main concepts in nanocomposites physics,
understand advantages and disadvantages
of different thermoplastics and thermoset
polymers as matrix materials. In addition
students will gain the knowledge of different

Spring 2021
manufacturing techniques of nanocomposites.
In addition to the text, the student will be
exposed to classic and current literature in the
field.

parameters, and thermodynamic stability/
instability mechanism of emulsions, creaming,
flocculation and coalescence will be discussed.
In addition, steric and depletion stabilization
will be discussed as well as double emulsions,
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
their characterization and stabilization by
biopolymers. Foams and ¿solid in liquid¿ will
CME 524: Chemical Processes in Cell
be explored and compared to emulsions. In
Biology
the entire course examples from the cosmetic,
The course specially designed for chemical
engineering students to provide an introduction cosmeceuticals and dermal and transdermal
applications will be discussed. In the last
to the various aspects of cell biology. The
prat industrial and practical problems will be
ideas of cell biology, including biochemistry
and bioenergetics, DNA and protein synthesis, discussed.
and mechanisms of cancer will be introduced. 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CME 525: Chemical and Biological
Sensors
Introduction to the field of chemosensor
and biosensor, as well as an in-depth and
quantitative view of the sensor design
and performance analysis. Fundamental
application of chemo/biosensor theory will
be demonstrated including recognition,
transduction, signal acquisition, and post
processing/data analysis. Topics are selected
to emphasize biomedical, bioprocessing,
environmental, and energy application.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CME 526: Computational Methods
This course aims to provide graduate-level
students with an in-depth acquaintance
with use of modern computational and
mathematical techniques in chemical
engineering including applied numerical
analysis, programming algorithms using
mathematical software, and applications of
computational methods to the solution of
mechanical engineering. Topics include a
discussion of the different analytical methods
and algorithms and how to apply these using
Matlab. In addition to the text, the student will
be exposed to classic and current literature in
the field.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CME 590: Surfactants, dispersion
technology and novel delivery vehicles
In the first part of the course the students
will learn the structures of monomeric,
polymeric, and biopolymeric surfactants.
Students will be taught how to prepare
and characterize surfactants. In the second
part students will learn how surfactants
arrange on surfaces and how they selfassemble in solution. Micellar solutions and
their properties such as interfacial tension,
aggregation number, and solubilization will be
studied. Also, preparation of micro emulsions;
solubilization of bioactives; stability/instability

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

CME 591: Sustainable Future Through
Renewable Energy- Advanced
The course will expose students to the role
of engineering, chemistry, climate change
in defining energy options, and a basic
understanding of chemical engineering and
technology in developing broad energy options
in developing countries. The course combines
lectures with utilization of carbon management
tools to calculate carbon footprint in a specific
country in a virtual environment.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CME 599: Research
Offered Fall and Spring
0-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
CME 695: Graduate Internship
Participation in private corporations, public
agencies, or non-profit institutions for ongoing
research activities related to thesis research.
Students will be required to have a faculty
coordinator as well as a contact in the outside
organization, to participate with them in
regular consultations on the project, and to
submit a final report to both.
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CME 696: Special Topics in Chemical
and Molecular Engineering
This course will provide an introduction to
numerical methods for engineering problems
in Python. You will learn the foundations of
scientific computing that can be applied to a
broad range of engineering problems. We will
cover the fundamental mathematical bases of
numerical methods used to describe physical
phenomena encountered in chemical processes
and will then describe how to implement them
using Python. The course will introduce you
to Python programming language and some
of the benefits it offers. Topics covered basic
data structure, solution of equations, data
fitting, plotting, function minimization, and

48

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
differential equations. No previous computing
experience is assumed.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CME 697: Chemical and Molecular
Engineering Colloquium
A weekly series of lectures and discussions by
visitors, local faculty, and students presenting
current research results.
0-3 credits, S/U grading
CME 698: CME 698 Practicum in
Teaching
Practicum in teaching under faculty
supervision.
0-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
CME 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Major portion of research must take place on
SBU campus, at Cold Spring Harbor, or at
Brookhaven National Lab.
0-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
CME 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus
Major portion of research will take place offcampus, but in the United States and/or U.S.
provinces.
0-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
CME 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus-International
Major Portion of research will take place
outside of the United States and/or U.S.
provinces.
0-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
CME 800: Full Time Summer Research
This course may be only taken by Ph.D.
candidates who are defending in the summer
S/U grading

CONSTRM
Consortium Agreement
CONSTRM AGRMNT: Credit earned as
transfer.
The procedure, which involves the completion
of a Consortium Agreement, permits a student
to attend another institution while receiving
financial aid through Stony Brook. It is
a process which is to be utilized only in
extenuating situations. A student who feels
that his/her situation can be documented and

Spring 2021
therefore warrants the use of this option should The course focuses on in-depth study of
contact the Financial Aid Office.
such important issues as virtual memory,
file systems, networking, and multiprocessor
0-12 credits,
support, with an eye to recent directions
May be repeated for credit.
in these areas. Textbook readings are
supplemented where appropriate by papers
from the research literature. An important
part of the course is the case study of an
Computer Science
actual operating system. Students study the
source code for this operating system and
CSE 502: Computer Architecture
do programming exercises and projects that
Topics covered include instruction pipelines
involve modifying the operating system and
and memory caches to improve computer
measuring its performance.
performance; instruction-level parallelism;
Prerequisite: CSE 306
machines: superscalar versus VLIW; cache
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
and main memory hierarchy design tradeoffs;
etc.)
compiler optimizations to speed pipelines;
low-power computer system design: processor, CSE 507: Introduction to
OS, and compiler support; graphics, DSP,
Computational Linguistics
and media processor design; disk I/O system
Overview of computational approaches
design; interconnections and networking; and
to language use. Core topics include
introduction to parallel architecture. Advanced mathematical and logical foundations, syntax,
topics include asynchronous microprocessors; semantics and progmatics. Special topics may
FPGA-based reconfigurable computing;
include speech processing, dialog system
system on a chip; embedded processors;
machine translation information extraction and
intelligent RAM and superconducting
information retrieval. Statistical and traditional
computers.
approaches are included. Students will develop
Prerequisite: CSE 345
familiarity with the literature and tools of the
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
field.
etc.)
Prerequisites: CSE 537; CSE 541

CSE

CSE 504: Compiler Design
This course covers advanced topics in
compilation, including memory management,
dataflow analysis, code optimization, just-intime compilation, and selected topics from
compilation of object-oriented and declarative
languages.
Prerequisites: CSE 304 and CSE 307
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
CSE 505: Computing with Logic
The course explores logic-based computing
and logic programming. It includes an
introduction to programming in logic, covering
basic techniques for solving problems in
a logic programming system. Particular
attention will be paid to user interface issues
and how a logic system can provide a useful
computing environment. The course covers
implementation issues, emphasizing how a
logic programming system generalizes both
traditional programming language systems and
traditional database systems.

recommended
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
CSE 508: Network Security
Principles and practice of Computer Network
Security. Cryptography, authentication
protocols, public key infrastructures, IP/www/
E-commerce security, firewalls, VPN, and
intrusion detection. Limited to CSE graduate
students. Others; permission of instructor.
Prerequisite: CSE/ISE 310, or CSE 346 or
equivalent.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 509: Computer System Security
Principles and practice of building and
administering secure systems. Authentication
and access control. Operating system security.
Program security, database security. Key
management. Information flow. Assurance.
Vulnerability analysis and intrusion detection.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

CSE 510: Hybrid Systems
Hybrid Systems combine discrete statemachines and continuous differential equations
CSE 506: Operating Systems
and have been used as models of a large
This course is an in-depth study of important
number of applications such as real-time
concepts and techniques found in modern
software, embedded systems, robotics,
computer operating systems. An undergraduate mechatronics, aerospace systems, process
course in operating systems is a prerequisite.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

49

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
control and biological systems. The course
will cover modeling, design, analysis, and
verification methods for hybrid systems.
Topics may include SAT/SMT solvers,
timed automata, formal logics for system
specification, verification algorithms and
closed-loop neural network control systems.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 511: Brain and Memory Modeling
An introduction to brain modeling.
Neuroscience topics include major brain
structures, constituent glia and neurons, and
synapses connecting neurons; how excited
neurons send ionic firing spikes to other
neurons; synapse changes during learning
and forgetting; connection structures for
stable ionic activity in neural networks;
and distributed firing patterns underlying
memory, perception, and thought. Computing
topics include efficient methods for modeling
electrical activity in single neurons using
NEURON and in networks of millions of
neurons using discrete event simulation.
Participants will code simulations OR use
neuroscience experience to refine brain
models.
Offered Fall, Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 512: Machine Learning
A course on the fundamentals of machine
learning, including basic models, formulations
and modern methods. Topics include
validation, classification, regression,
clustering, component analysis and
graphic models.Students are expected to
have the following background:Working
knowledge of probability theory and
statistics,Working knowledge of linear
algebra and algorithms,Working knowledge
of basic computer science principles at a level
sufficient to write a reasonably non-trivial
computer program in a language of preference
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 514: Data Analytics Software
Stacks and Algorithms
Architecture, and design of data analytics
software stacks. We will cover MapReduce/
Hadoop/Dryad/Twister, Hadoop File System
(HDFS), HBASE, NOSQL tools such as
MongoDB, Cassandra, HIVE; column
oriented database systems such as Vertica
and MonetDB. We will also cover data
analysis management systems that target the
scientific domain such as ADIOS, sciDB;
streaming systems such as IBM System S/
DataCutter. Systems, data structures and
algorithms to support management and
analysis of spatio-temporal data from video

Spring 2021
cameras, satelliteds, telescopes or beamlines.
We will study statistical methods, machine
learning and image anlysis/reconstruction
methods used in big data/data analytic
problems. Finally, we will survey big data/
data analytic problems from several domains
including biomedical analysis of multi
scale, multi-modal biomedical imaging
data, next generation genetic and demonic
data, analysis of electronic medical record/
population heath data; internet,internet search,
recommender systems; and engineering and
physical science,analysis of experimental
and simulation data associated with design of
energetic materials, oil reservoir simulation,
nuclear fusion and self-driving cars.

This is part two of an interdisciplinary course
sequence (1 credit each) is designed for
students in computer science (CS) and students
of technology and society (DTS). Students
taking this course will enhance their abilities
to critically think and build awareness for
science and technology (ST) and their societal
aspects. They will learn strategies for assessing
important questions such as: what should I
focus my efforts on, where are societal needs,
what policies are required or can be taken
advantage of, how can I possibly influence
policy, and finally, what are the dangers
when developing new ST. To teach these
topics the course takes a practical approach.
The first section of the sequence examines
historical science and technology successes
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
and failures. Then, in the second section, teams
composed of students from both the CS and
CSE 515: Introduction to Transaction
DTS departments conduct case studies of
Processing Systems
existing ST or design and implement new ST
Discusses transaction processing systems.
Topics covered include models of transactions, under the perspectives of the course. 1 credit
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
including nested transactions and workflow;
architectures of transaction processing
CSE 518: Foundations of Human
systems, including client-server, two-tiered
Computer Interactions
and three-tiered architectures; concurrency
controls for conventional and relational
The focus of this course is on the design,
databases including two-phase locking and the evaluation, and implementation of interactive
SQL isolation levels; logging and recovery;
computing systems for human use and on the
distributed transactions including the twostudy of major phenomena surrounding them.
phase commit protocol; replication; Internet
This course will provide the students with a
commerce, including encryption, the SSL and strong grounding in the guidelines, principles,
SET protocols, goods atomicity, and electronic methodologies, tools, and techniques for
cash. Fall
analyzing, designing, and evaluating user
interfaces and interaction techniques. Topics
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
include: 1) Human Information Processing
System 2) Interaction Behavior Modeling
CSE 516: Science for Society I
3) Computational Interface Design 4) User
This is part one of an interdisciplinary course
Centered Design 5) Sketching and Prototyping
sequence (1 credit each) is designed for
students in computer science (CS) and students 6) Usability Testing 7) Heuristic Evaluation 8)
Natural User Interfaces & the Future of Uls 9)
of technology and society (DTS). Students
State-of-the-art research within HCI
taking this course will enhance their abilities
to critically think and build awareness for
science and technology (ST) and their societal
aspects. They will learn strategies for assessing
important questions such as: what should I
focus my efforts on, where are societal needs,
what policies are required or can be taken
advantage of, how can I possibly influence
policy, and finally, what are the dangers
when developing new ST. To teach these
topics the course takes a practical approach.
The first section of the sequence examines
historical science and technology successes
and failures. Then, in the second section, teams
composed of students from both the CS and
DTS departments conduct case studies of
existing ST or design and implement new ST
under the perspectives of the course. 1 credit
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 519: Data Science Fundamentals
Knowledge discovery in data is the non-trivial
process of identifying valid, novel, potentially
useful, and ultimately understandable patterns
in data (Fayyad et al. 1996). Large-scale
data generated by humans and machines
is available everywhere. Acquiring the
fundamental skills on how to 1) analyze
and understand as well as 2) manage and
process these large datasets are crucial in
today¿s date-driven world, for producing data
products that solve real-world problems. This
course will cover the fundamental concepts
in date science, to equip students with the key
skillset toward becoming good data scientists.
Major topics include scoping projects, data
preparation, statistics basics, visualization,

CSE 517: Science for Society II

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

50

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
statistical learning, data mining, various types
of structured and
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 521: Data Mining Concepts and
Techniques
Data Mining is a new, promising and
flourishing interdisciplinary field drawing
work from areas including database
technology, artificial intelligence,
machine learning, pattern recognition,
high-performance computing, and data
visualization. It focuses on issues relating
to the feasibility, usefulness, efficiency
and scalability of techniques for automated
extraction of patterns representing knowledge
implicitly stored in large databases,
warehouses, and other massive information
repositories. The course gives a broad, yet indepth overview of the field of data mining and
presents one or two techniques in rigorous
detail. Prerequisite: Database course

Spring 2021
for CSE 523 and completes the project in a
subsequent semester by registering for CSE
524 under the supervision of the same faculty
member.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CSE 525: Introduction to Robotics
This course introduces fundamental concepts
in Robotics. In the first half of the course,
basic concepts will be discussed, including
coordinate transformation, kinematics,
dynamics. Laplace transforms, equations of
motion, feedback and feedforward control,
and trajectory planning. These topics will be
exemplified with Matlab/Simulink simulation
studies. The second half of the course will
focus on applying the knowledge from the
initial lectures to various motor systems,
including manipulators, artificial eye systems,
locomotory systems, and mobile robotics.
There will be homeworks for Matlab/Simulink
and a final project, a midterm and a final.

interaction. The students will implement a
substantial graphics application program.
Prerequisite: CSE 328
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 529: Simulation and Modeling
A comprehensive course in formulation,
implementation, and application of simulation
models. Topics include data structures,
simulation languages, statistical analysis,
pseudo-random number generation, and design
of simulation experiments. Students apply
simulation modeling methods to problems of
their own design. This course is offered as
CSE 529, AMS 553 and MBA 553.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

CSE 522: Special Project in Computer
Science
Project in a sub-discipline of Computer
Science, including but not limited to, computer
architecture, operating systems, programming
languages, compliers, artificial intelligence,
networking, computer graphics, data mining,
databases, computer vision, visualization,
computer security, mobile computing,
parallel processing, logic programming,
hybrid systems, simulation and modeling,
computational biology, and multimedia.

CSE 526: Principles of Programming
Languages
Discusses programming language concepts
and design, with emphasis on abstraction
mechanisms. Topics include language
paradigms (procedural, object-oriented,
functional, and logic), language concepts
(values, bindings, types, modules), and
foundations (lambda calculus, denotational
semantics). Examples will be drawn from
several representative languages, such as C,
Java, Standard ML, and Prolog.

CSE 530: GEOMETRIC FOUNDATNS
This course will focus on mathematical
tools, geometric modeling techniques, and
fundamental algorithms that are relevant
to graphics, visualization, and other visual
computing areas. The goal is to provide
graduate students with a comprehensive
knowledge on geometric concepts and
demonstrate the significance of these
mathematical tools and geometric algorithms
in graphics and relevant areas. Course
topics include geometric algorithms for
both polygonal and curved objects, theory
of parametric and implicit representations,
modeling methods of curves, surfaces, and
solids, in-depth spline theory, rudiments
of wavelet theory and multi-resolution
shape representations, differential geometry
fundamentals, and other sophisticated topics
and latest advances in the field.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Prerequisite: CSE 307
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

Prerequisites: CSE 328 and CSE 332
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

CSE 527: Introduction to Computer
Vision
Introduction to basic concepts in computer
vision. Low level image analysis, image
formation, edge detection, segmentation.
Image transformations for image synthesis
methods for 3D scene reconstruction, motion
analysis, object recognition.

CSE 531: Performance Analysis of
Systems
This is a new course that covers topics in the
performance analysis of computer systems.
The contents of the course should prove very
helpful for computer science students who
wish to analyze computer systems and learn
more about how to improve the performance
of systems. Existing courses do not cover this
material. The course is targeted primarily at
PhD and Masters students in the Computer
Science Department, however upper-level
undergraduates can take the course as well. In
addition, students from AMS, Math and ECE
would also benefit from the course contents.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

CSE 523: Advanced Project in
Computer Science I
First part of an advanced project in computer
science that will extend over two semesters.
The student starts the project in one semester
by registering for CSE523 and completes the
project in a following semester by registering
for CSE524. CSE523/524 sequence must be
on the same project under the direction of the
same advisor. The student must identify a
faculty advisor before registering.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

CSE 528: Computer Graphics
This course emphasizes a hands-on approach
to the use of computer graphics. The
CSE 524: Advanced Project in
topics covered include models, picture
Computer Science II
description, and interaction; c windowing,
Part 2 of a 2-semester advanced research
clipping, panning, and zooming; geometrical
and development project undertaken by
transformations in 2D and 3D; algorithms for
MS students under the supervision of a CS
raster displays (scan-line conversion, polygon
graduate program faculty member. The student fill, polygon clipping, etc.); hidden line and
starts the project in one semester by registering hidden surface removal, shading models; user
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 532: Theory of Database Systems
The course will cover advanced topics in
modern database systems, including object51

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
oriented databases, rule-based databases,
temporal and active databases, parallel and
distributed databases, distributed object model,
data mining, online analytical processing, data
warehousing, multimedia databases.
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 533: Network Programming
Topics include Unix and Linux socket
API programming at the TCP, UDP, IP
(raw sockets) and datalink access (Linux
PF_PACKET sockets, libpcap & libnet
libraries) levels, in the context of developing
and implementing client-server applications,
reliable data transfer using TCP-like rdt and
flow control mechanisms, routing protocols,
address resolution protocols, multicasting,
DNS protocols.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 534: Fundamentals of Computer
Networks
Internet protocol layers. Internet Architecture.
Link layer and multiple access protocols.
Local area networks including wireless LANs.
Routing on the Internet. Intra- and Interdomain routing. Mobile routing. Transport
layer and TCP congestion control. Scheduling
and fairness. Application layers. Overlay and
P2P networks. Content distribution networks.
Network performance modeling.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 535: Distributed Systems
Discusses asynchronous systems, their
description using concurrent and distributed
programming languages, and their verification.
Topics include concurrent programming using
shared memory and message passing, formal
semantics of communication, reliability, and
concurrent algorithms.

Spring 2021
CSE 537: Artificial Intelligence
A comprehensive introduction to the problems
of artificial intelligence and techniques for
attacking them. Topics include problem
representation, problem-solving methods,
search, pattern recognition, natural language
processing, learning, expert systems, AI
programming languages and techniques.
Covers both theoretical methods and practical
implementations.
Prerequisites: MAT 371 or CSE 541
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 538: Natural Lang Process
CSE 540: Theory of Computation
Topics include models of computation:
finite-state machines, stack machines, Turing
machines, Church's thesis; computability
theory: halting problem and unsolvability,
introductory recursion theory; complexity
theory: complexity measures, time and space
hierarchy, NP-complete problems.
Prerequisite: CSE 303
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 541: Logic in Computer Science
A survey of the logical foundations of
mathematics and the relationships to computer
science; development of propositional calculus
and quantification theory; the notions of
a proof and of a model; the completeness
theorem.
Pre- or co-requisite: MAT 313 and CSE 213
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

CSE 542: Big Data Systems,
Algorithms and Networks
Recent progress on big data systems,
algorithms and networks. Topics include
the web graph, search engines, targeted
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
advertisements, online algorithms and
competitive analysis, and analytics, storage,
CSE 536: Introduction to User-Interface
resource allocation, and security in big data
Development
systems.
Survey of user-interface systems, includes
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
command language, windowing, multiple
input/output devices, architecture of user
CSE 544: Probability and Statistics for
interface management systems, toolkits for
Data Scientists
designing user-interface, human factors,
The course will cover core concepts of
standards, visual languages. The course also
probability theory and an assortment of
includes discussion of emerging technologies,
standard statistical techniques. Specific
such as systems for cooperative work,
topics will include random variables and
physically distributed user-interfaces,
distributions, quantitative research methods
parallelism and user-interfaces, virtual reality.
(correlation and regression), and modern
A substantial project requiring the design,
techniques of optimization and matching
implementation, and evaluation of a userlearning (clustering and prediction).
interface will be required
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 545: Big Data Analytics
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

The course will cover concepts and standard
tools used to analyze, so called, Big Data.
Specifically, it will cover algorithmic
approaches to analyzing large datasets:
MapReduce, graph analytics, text analytics,
steaming algorithms, as well as modern
distribution analysis platforms (e.g. Hadoop,
Spark).
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 546: Cryptography
Cryptography studies how to perform
computational tasks securely in adversarial
environments. It plays an important role
in designing secure systems. This is an
introductory course that covers basic concepts
and proof techniques in this area, as well
as some recent research trends. The course
is theoretical in nature, with emphasis on
proofs and algorithmic reductions, even when
discussing applied topics. No prior background
in cryptography is assumed. However, students
should have mathematical maturity and be
comfortable with definitions and proofs.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 547: Discrete Mathematics
This course introduces such mathematical
tools as summations, number theory, binomial
coefficients, generating functions, recurrence
relations, discrete probability, asymptotics,
combinatorics, and graph theory for use in
algorithmic and combinatorial analysis. This
course is offered as both CSE 547 and AMS
547.
Prerequisite for CSE 547: AMS 301
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
CSE 548: Analysis of Algorithms
Techniques for designing efficient algorithms,
including choice of data structures, recursion,
branch and bound, divide and conquer, and
dynamic programming. Complexity analysis
of searching, sorting, matrix multiplication,
and graph algorithms. Standard NP-complete
problems and polynomial transformation
techniques. This course is offered as both
AMS 542 and CSE 548.
Prerequisite for CSE 548: CSE 373
recommended
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
CSE 549: Computational Biology
This course focuses on current problems in
computational biology and bioinformatics.
Our emphasis will be algorithmic, on
discovering appropriate combinatorial
algorithm problems and the techniques to
solve them. Primary topics will include DNA
52

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

sequence assembly, DNA/protein sequence
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
comparison, hybridization array analysis, RNA
CSE 555: Computational Geometry
and protein folding, and phylogenic trees.
Study of the fundamental algorithmic problems
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
associated with geometric computations,
including convex hulls, Voronoi diagrams,
CSE 550: Quantum Computing and
triangulation, intersection, range queries,
Applications
visibility, arrangements, and motion
This course is an introduction to and survey
planning for robotics. Algorithmic methods
of the Quantum Computing, an emerging
interdisciplinary field of science which has the include plane sweep, incremental insertion,
randomization, divide-and-conquer, etc. This
potential to revolutionize computation over
course is offered as both AMS 545 and CSE
the next ten years, to transform chemistry,
555.
medicine, engineering and communications,
as well as to change our understanding
of physical world. The course will build
intuitive approach to quantum computation
and algorithms, but also will advance relevant
vocabulary and skills for faculties and graduate
students in engineering, computing, applied
mathematics, chemistry, physics and related
sciences.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 551: Smart Energy in the
Information Age
Energy and sustainability have become critical
issues of our generation. While the abundant
potential of renewable energy sources, such
as solar and wind, provides a real opportunity
for sustainability, their intermittency and
uncertainty present a daunting operational
challenge. This course studies how to use
Information Technology (IT) to improve
sustainability in our energy-hungry society.
In particular, topics include the applications
of mathematical modeling, algorithm design,
optimization, game theory, and control theory
in real systems. The goal of the course is to
provide rigorous foundations for the study of
smart energy management for sustainability.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 552: Energy Efficient Computing
Energy is an important resource for a wide
range of computer systems from laptops
to data centers and clouds. There has been
considerable recent research on the topic
of of improving energy efficiency, cutting
across different areas of Computer Science
including Computer Architecture (e.g., energy
efficient processor design), Networking (e.g.,
putting the network to sleep), Storage (e.g.,
exploiting idle I/O periods to spin down
disks), Distributed Systems (e.g., capacity
provisioning), Mobile Systems (e.g., putting
the radio receiver to sleep in a smartphone),
and Modeling/Analytics (e.g., modeling a
server's power consumption). This course
covers the recent research trends in energyefficient computing, focusing specifically on
themes and techniques for achieving efficiency
in computer systems.

Prerequisite for CSE 555: CSE 373 or CSE
548
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
CSE 564: Visualization
The course emphasizes a hands-on approach
to scientific, medical, and information
visualization and visual analytics. Topics
include: traditional visualization techniques,
the visualization process, visual perception
and cognition, basic graphics and imaging
concepts, visualization of sampled, observed,
and computed data, volume and flow
visualization, information visualization,
human-computer interaction, and the coupling
of intelligent computing with visualization
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

linear systems theory, the Fourier Transform,
and numerical optimization. Popular
techniques for the visualization, segmentation,
and analysis of medical image data will also be
discussed, as well as applications of medical
imaging, such as image-guided intervention.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 581: Computer Science
Fundamentals: Theory
The course consists of two parts. The first
part covers discrete mathematics -- a division
of mathematics that is extensively used in
computer science. The topics covered include:
logic (propositional logic and predicate logic),
proof techniques, sequences (mathematical
induction and recursion), and functions. The
second part covers the theory of computation
-- a division of theoretical computer science
that deals with what can be computed and
what cannot be computed on a computer. The
topics covered include: computational models
(FA, PDA, and Turing machines), grammars
accepted by different computational models
(regular grammars, context-free grammars, and
unrestricted grammars), languages accepted
by different computational models (regular
languages, context-free language, and Turingacceptable languages), Turing-complete
systems, and algorithmically unsolvable
problems.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

CSE 566: Virtual Reality
CSE 570: Wireless and Mobile
Networks
Wireless communication fundamentals:
wireless signal transmission, coding,
multiplexing. Link, network and transport
layer protocols for wireless and mobile
networking: medium access control,
transmission scheduling, wireless capacity,
protocols for wireless multi-hop networks.
Cellular networks. Wireless LANs: mobile
IP, TCP over wireless networks. Mobile
applications. Localization and location
management, Network coding. Wireless
security.
Offered
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 577: Medical Imaging
This course presents an introduction to the
mathematical, physical, and computational
principles underlying modern medical imaging
systems. It covers fundamentals of X-ray
radiography, X-ray computed tomography
(CT), ultrasonic imaging, nuclear imaging,
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and
functional MRI (fMRI), as well as more
general concepts required for these, such as

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

CSE 582: Computer Science
Fundamentals: Data Structures and
Algorithms
The course consists of two parts. The first
part covers data structures to efficiently store,
organize, modify, and access data. Topics
include: arrays, stacks, queues, linked lists,
trees, sets, hash maps, priority queues, and
graphs. The second part covers the design and
analysis of algorithms for solving computer
science problems. Topics include: algorithm
analysis, exhaustive search algorithms, divideand-conquer algorithms, greedy algorithms,
and dynamic programming algorithms.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 587: Proficiency Requirement
This course is used by students to fill any
gaps in key CS proficiency background) areas
identified at the time of admission. This course
is done under the supervision of a faculty
member teaching an undergraduate course in
the needed proficiency area. By permission of
the Graduate Program only.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CSE 590: Topics in Computer Science
53

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
An advanced lecture course on a new topic
in computer science. The course is primarily
designed for M.S. students, but can be taken by
Ph.D. students as well. Semester supplements
to this Bulletin contain specific description
when course is offered. May be repeated
for credit as the topic changes, but cannot
be used more than twice to satisfy CSE
major requirements for M.S. Limited to
CSE graduate students; others permission of
instructor.

Spring 2021
Ph.D. students as well. Semester supplements
to this Bulletin contain specific description
when course is offered. May be repeated as the
topic changes, but cannot be used more than
twice to satisfy the CSE major requirements
for the M.S.

lectures by faculty members and visitors,
selected readings, and introductory-level
research problems. Prerequisite: Permission of
instructor
0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

Fall, Spring, every year, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

CSE 602: Advanced Computer
Architecture
The focus will be on the architectural rather
CSE 595: Advanced Topics in
than micro-architectural issues, and a systems
Computer Science
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
approach to computer architecture taking
etc.)
An advanced lecture course on a new topic
into account the interaction between the
May be repeated for credit.
in computer science. This course is primarily
architecture and the compiler, operating
designed for M.S. students, but can be taken by system, database, and networking. The course
CSE 591: Topics in Computer Science Ph.D. students as well. Semester supplements
starts with superscalar/VLIW processor
An advanced lecture course on a new topic
to this Bulletin contain specific description
architecture and proceeds to memory
in computer science. The course is primarily
when course is offered. May be repeated for
hierarchy, storage systems, network hardware,
designed for M.S. students, but can be taken by credit as the topic changes, but cannot be used graphics processor, and database machines.
Ph.D. students as well. Semester supplements
more than twice to satisfy the SCE major
The emphasis will be on hands-on evaluation
to this Bulletin contain specific description
requirements for the M.S.
of architectural ideas, the exploration of
when course is offered. May be repeated
software/hardware design trade-offs, and the
Fall, Spring, every year, 3 credits, Letter
for credit as the topic changes, but cannot
articulation of experimental procedures and
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
be used more than twice to satisfy CSE
performance analysis. A publication-quality
May be repeated for credit.
major requirements for M.S. Limited to CSE
class project will be required.
graduate students; others, permission of
CSE 596: MS Internship Project Off3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
instructor.
Campus
CSE 605: Performance Evaluation of
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
Participation in internships at private
Computer Systems
etc.)
corporations, public agencies, or non-profit
May be repeated for credit.
institutions. Students will be required to have
The purpose of this course is to provide
a faculty coordinator as well as a contact in the background and training in understanding and
CSE 592: Advanced Topics in
outside organization to participate with them
evaluating performance of computer systems,
Computer Science
in regular consultations on the project, and to
including centralized, distributed, parallel,
An advanced lecture course on a new topic
submit a final report to both. This course is
client/server based systems, and computer
in computer science. The course is primarily
intended for MS students interning off campus. communication networks. The goal is to
designed for M.S. students, but can be taken by 1 credit, S/U grading
develop a perspective on how the performance
Ph.D. students as well. Semester supplements
of computer systems or networks should be
May be repeated for credit.
to this Bulletin contain specific description
evaluated in order to decide on various design
when course is offered. may be repeated
alternatives. The course will include various
CSE 597: MS Internship Project on
for credit as the topic changes, but cannot
analytical techniques, mainly based on Markov
Campus
be used more than twice to satisfy CSE
models and queuing theory, and simulation
Participation in internships at private
major requirements for M.S. Limited to CSE
modeling.
corporations, public agencies, or non-profit
graduate students; others, permission of
Prerequisites: Limited to CSE graduate
institutions. Students will be required to have
instructor.
a faculty coordinator as well as a contact in the students; others permission of instructor.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
outside organization to participate with them
etc.)
in regular consultations on the project, and to
CSE 608: Advanced Computer Security
May be repeated for credit.
submit a final report to both. This course is
intended for MS students interning on campus. Advanced course on principles and
CSE 593: Independent Study in
practice of engineering secure information
1 credit, S/U grading
Computer Science
systems. Topics covered include threats and
May be repeated for credit.
Research and/or project work under the
vulnerabilities, counter measures, legal policy
supervision of a Computer Science graduate
issues, risk management and assurance. InCSE 599: M.S. Thesis Research
program faculty.
depth coverage of various research problems,
Thesis research under supervision of CS
which will vary from one offering of the
1-9 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
graduate program faculty for MS students.
course to another.
May be repeated for credit.
1-12 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Prerequisite: CSE 508 or CSE 509 or
May be repeated for credit.
CSE 594: Advanced Topics in
permission of instructor.
Computer Science
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 600: Research in Modern
An advanced lecture course on a new topics
Computer Science
CSE 610: Parallel Computer
in computer science. This course is primarily
A survey of current computer science research
Architectures
designed for M.S. students, but can be taken by areas and issues. This course comprises
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

54

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Topics include parallel computer systems;
important parallel applications; parallel
computation models; interconnection
networks; SIMD and MIMD architectures;
hybrid architectures; memory management;
cache coherence; distributed shared memory;
synchronization methods; operating systems;
compilers; and programming tools.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 613: Parallel Programming
Algorithms and technique for programming
highly parallel computers. Trends in parallel
and distributed computing; shared address
space and message passing architectures;
design issues for parallel algorithms;
converting sequential algorithms into
equivalent parallel algorithms; synchronization
and data sharing; improving performance of
parallel algorithms; interconnection network
topologies, routing, and flow control; latency
limits on speedup of algorithms by parallel
implementations.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 614: Advanced Programming
Languages
Selected topics on advanced programming
languages technology. Program analysis and
transformation, program optimization and
program manipulation systems. Very highlevel and declarative languages such as sets
and relations based languages and deductive
and object-oriented languages.
Prerequisite: CSE 526 or CSE 504
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
CSE 615: Advanced Computer Vision
Survey of methods used for the analysis of
images by computer, including computer
vision and pattern recognition. Topics to
be covered are image formation, image
segmentation and edge detection, binary
images and shape analysis, shape from
shading, motion field and optical flow, surface
inference, classification techniques.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 617: Advanced Topics in Wireless
Networks
Advance topics taken from ad hoc wireless
networks and sensor networks. Will comprise
of lectures, presentations and/or a project.
Prerequisite: Limited to CSE graduate
students; others, permission of instruction.
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
CSE 620: Virtual Reality

Spring 2021
Practical issues in the design and
implementation of virtual environments.
Topics include system requirements,
transformations, user-interaction models,
human vision models, input/output devices
and techniques, tracking systems, augmented
reality, and virtual-reality applications. The
course will involve a substantial programming
project to implement an immersive virtual
reality system.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 626: Switching and Routing in
Parallel and Distributed Systems
This course covers various switching and
routing issues in parallel and distributed
systems. Topics include message switching
techniques, design of interconnection
networks, permutation, multicast and all-toall routing in various networking nonblocking,
and rearrangable capability analysis and
performance modeling.

CSE 621: Physics-based Modeling for
Visual Computing
A unified approach to various fields such
as graphics, visualization, computer-aided
geometric design, biomedical imaging,
vision, and virtual environment. The course
will explore select research topics centered
on physics-based modeling methodology
and associated computational methods
for theoretical and practical problems in
widespread areas of visual computing. The
emphasis will be on geometric and solid
modeling, geometric design techniques,
wavelets and multi-resolution analysis,
deformable models based on mathematical
physics, variational analysis, optimization
methods, numerical simulation with finitedifference and finite-element algorithms,
differential equations for initial-value and
boundary-value problems, force-driven
interaction with constraints, dynamic sculpting
system, and a large variety of applications for
visual computing.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

CSE 633: Computability and
Undecidability
Computability theory based on Turing
machines and recursive functions; proof by
diagonalization and reducibility; unsolvable
problems in set, group, number and language
theory; reducibility orderings and degrees
of unsolvability; priority methods and Post's
problem. Prerequisite: CSE 540 or consent of
instructor.

CSE 624: Advanced Operating
Systems
Students will study advanced operating system
topics and be exposed to recent developments
in operating systems research. In addition to
being conversant in classic and recent research
papers, this course aims to teach students
to read research papers critically, formulate
new research questions, and evaluate these
questions experimentally. Topics to be covered
typically include: distributed systems, cloud
computing and data centers, operating system
design, virtual machines, OS interaction with
the hardware architecture, synchronization and
communication, file systems, and security.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 625: Advanced Asynchronous
Systems
Formal specification and verification of
asynchronous systems. Topics include
concurrent programming, process algebras,
logics for describing the properties of
concurrent systems, and formal semantics of
communication.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

CSE 628: Natural Language
Processing
The course offers computationally-oriented
introduction to natural language processing
(NLP). The focus is on modern quantitative
techniques in NLP: algorithms and statistical
approaches to word-level, syntactic, and
semantic processing of natural language.
The choice of topics includes practically
motivated questions in NLP such as (1) can
we teach computers to automatically detect
authorship of a document? (2) can computers
automatically suggest paraphrases (phrases
with similar meaning) to help with writing?
Prerequisite: Familiarity with either Artificial
Intelligence or Machine Learning is strongly
recommended, but not absolutely required.
Limited to CSE Graduate Students
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 638: Advanced Algorithms
This is an advanced course in the design and
analysis of combinatorial algorithms, focusing
on recent material and special topics, including
randomized algorithms, approximation
algorithms for NP-complete problems,
string algorithms, amortized analysis of data
structures, and heuristic methods such as
simulated annealing. Material will be selected
to have little or no overlap with traditional
introductory algorithms courses.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSE 639: Seminar in Advanced Topics
in Computer Science
55

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
May be repeated for credit.
CSE 641: Seminar in Logic in
Computer Science
CSE 642: Seminar in Algorithms
May be repeated for credit.
CSE 643: Seminar in Concurrency
May be repeated for credit.
CSE 644: Seminar in Databases
May be repeated for credit.
CSE 645: Seminar in Languages
May be repeated for credit.
CSE 646: Seminar in Artificial
Intelligence
CSE 648: Seminar in Graphics

Spring 2021
modeling and specification, analysis and
verification, design and optimization, code
generation, simulation and testing. Tool
support. Applications and case studies.

CSE 672: Special Topics in Image
Processing

Prerequisite: Limited to CSE graduate
students; others need instructor consent
Fall, 1 credit, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

CSE 674: Special Topics in Operating
Systems

CSE 658: Seminar on Mobile and
Wireless Networking
This seminar course will draw topics from
mobile and wireless networks of current
interest. The main focus will be multi-hop
wireless networks. It will cover topics on
mobile routing, multiple access and transport
protocols for such networks. It will also cover
topics from micromobility architectures and
pervasive computing.
Prerequisites: Limited to CSE graduate
students; others permission of instructor.
Fall, 1 credit, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

May be repeated for credit.

May be repeated for credit.

CSE 659: Seminar in Computer
Security
Seminar course, covering various research
problems in computer security.

CSE 650: Seminar in Architecture

Spring, 1 credit, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

CSE 649: Seminar in Operating
Systems

May be repeated for credit.
CSE 651: Seminar in Secure
Computation

CSE 660: Seminar in Media Networks
Graduate seminar that covers recent work on
multimedia and networks.

May be repeated for credit.

May be repeated for credit.
CSE 677: Special Topics in User
Interfaces
May be repeated for credit.
CSE 681: Special Topics in Computer
Vision
Advanced research topics course.
Prerequisite: Limited to CSE graduate
students; others need instructor consent
Fall, 2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CSE 684: Special Topics in Computer
Security
Special topics course, covering selected
research areas in computer security.
Spring, 2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CSE 686: Special Topics in Data
Privacy
Advanced research topics course.

Fall, 1 credit, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

Limited to CSE graduate students; others,
permission of instructor.
Spring, 2 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

CSE 661: Seminar in Data Privacy
Current research in Data Privacy.

CSE 687: Special Topics in Applied
Cryptography
May be repeated for credit.

CSE 654: Seminar in Visualization

Limited to CSE graduate students; others,
permission of instructor.
Spring, 1 credit, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

May be repeated for credit.

CSE 662: Seminar in Medical Imaging

CSE 655: Seminar in Natural Language
Processing

May be repeated for credit.

May be repeated for credit.
CSE 652: Seminar in User Interfaces
May be repeated for credit.
CSE 653: Seminar in Virtual Reality
May be repeated for credit.

May be repeated for credit.

CSE 665: Special Topics in Theory of
Computing

CSE 656: Seminar in Computer Vision May be repeated for credit.
Current readings in computer vision and image CSE 669: Special Topics in Databases
understanding.
May be repeated for credit.
Prerequisite: Limited to CSE graduate
students; others need instructor consent
CSE 670: Special Topics in Languages
Fall, 1 credit, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
May be repeated for credit.
CSE 657: Seminar in Design Analysis
Methods for constructing reliable and
efficient computer systems. Topics include:

CSE 671: Special Topics in Artificial
Intelligence
May be repeated for credit.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

CSE 690: Advanced Topics in
Computer Science
An advanced lecture course on a new topics
in computer science. This course is primarily
designed for PhD students, but can be taken by
M.S. students as well. Semester supplements to
this Bulletin contain specific description when
course is offered. May be repeated for credit
as the topic changes, but cannot be used more
than twice to satisfy CSE major requirements
for M.S. Limited to CSE graduate students;
others permission of instructor
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CSE 691: Advanced Topics in
Computer Science
An advanced course on a new topic in
computer science. This course is primarily
56

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

designed for Ph.D. students, but can be
taken by M.S. students as well. Semester
supplements to this Bulletin contain specific
description when course is offered. may be
repeated for credit as the topic changes, but
cannot be used more than twice to satisfy
CSE major requirements for M.S. Limited to
CSE graduate students; others permission of
instructor.

Participation in internships at private
corporations, public agencies, or non-profit
institutions. Students will be required to have
a faculty coordinator as well as a contact in the
outside organization to participate with them
in regular consultations on the project, and
to submit a final report to both. This course
is intended for PhD students interning on
campus.

Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

1 credit, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

CSE 692: Advanced Topics in
Computer Science
An advanced lecture course on a new topic
in computer science. This course is primarily
designed for Ph.D. students, but can be
taken by M.S. students as well. Semester
supplements to this Bulletin contain specific
description when course is offered. may be
repeated for credit as the topic changes, but
cannot be used more than twice to satisfy
CSE major requirements for M.S. Limited to
CSE graduate students; others permission of
instructor.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CSE 693: Advanced Topics in
Computer Science
An advanced lecture course on a new topic in
Computer Science. This course is primarily
designed for Ph.D. students, but can be
taken by M.S. students as well. Semester
supplements to this Bulletin contain specific
description when course is offered. May be
repeated for credit as the topic changes, but
cannot be used more than twice to satisfy
CSE major requirements for M.S. Limited to
CSE graduate students; others permission of
instructor.

All international students must received
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
CSE 800: FT SUMMER RESEARCH
May be repeated for credit.

CSM
Center for Science and

CSE 698: Practicum in Teaching
Mathematics Education
Supervised teaching in a course identified by
the student and the Graduate Program Director. CSM 510: Biology Education Research:
Teaching, Learning, and Assessment
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Introduction to core policy documents,
May be repeated for credit.
standards, concepts, and empirical methods
in biology education research and their
CSE 699: Dissertation Research on
applications to undergraduate classroom
Campus
settings. Appropriate for graduate students in
Thesis research for PhD students who have
advanced to candidacy (G5 status). This course the biological sciences and/or those enrolled in
the Ph.D. Program in Science Education.
is taken by students when a major portion of
the research is done on campus, at Cold Spring 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Harbor, or at the Brookhaven National Lab.
CSM 545: The Nature of Science
1-9 credits, S/U grading
The nature of science refers to the values and
May be repeated for credit.
assumptions inherent in the development,
understanding and interpretation of scientific
CSE 700: Dissertation Research off
knowledge. Scientific knowledge is
Campus - Domestic
empirically based, culturally embedded,
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place tentative, and incorporates subjectivity
and creativity. This course will address
off-campus, but in the United States and/
the following: What is science? What
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab distinguishes science from other ways of
knowing or as being basic science, applied
are considered on-campus. All international
science or technology? What philosophical,
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised social, ethical and historical perspectives
are important in understanding the nature of
by an International Advisor.
science?
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

CSE 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
CSE 696: PhD Internship Project Offplace outside of the United States and/or
Campus
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
Participation in internships at private
option of the health plan and may also enroll
corporations, public agencies, or non-profit
in MEDEX. International students who are
institutions. Students will be required to have
in their home country are not covered by
a faculty coordinator as well as a contact in the mandatory health plan and must contact the
outside organization to participate with them
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
in regular consultations on the project, and
be removed. International students who are
to submit a final report to both. This course
not in their home country are charged for the
is intended for PhD students interning off
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
campus.
covered by another insurance plan they must
1-3 credits, S/U grading
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
May be repeated for credit.
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.
CSE 697: PhD Internship Project On
Campus
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

CSM 546: Topics Biotechnology
An introduction to the field of biotechnology.
The course will survey the history of
the development of genetic engineering,
methodologies used in biotechnology,
applications of biotechnology in medicine,
agriculture and manufacturing, and the
implications of these technologies for
society. Intended for the students in the
MAT Science and MALS programs. This
course has an associated fee. Please see
www.stonybrook.edu/course fees for more
information. Offered
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
CSM 547: Topics in Genetics
A survey of genetics organized around a
particular topic, including gene regulation,
57

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

CSM 552: Current Concepts in
Neurobiology
Neurological disorders such as Parkinson's
and Alzheimer's have been the center of
much media attention recently. This lecture
and laboratory course is designed to provide
students with a basic overview of the brain and
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
nervous system. Course participants will also
CSM 548: Current Topics in
utilize current approaches taken by research
Microbiology
scientists to investigate the properties of the
A survey of microbiology with an emphasis on nervous system and its disorders. Laboratory
activities that can be used in secondary school
microbial ecology, the role of microbes in the
biosphere and the methodology used to explore curricula will be emphasized. Prerequisite:
Undergraduate degree in Biology
these areas. The course is organized around
two resources available online: Unseen Life
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
on Earth: An Introduction to Microbiology,
which was produced by The American Society CSM 553: Biology and Human Social
for Microbiology (http://www.learner.org/
and Sexual Behavior
resources/series121.html) and the New
A biological theory of human uniqueness
York State core curriculum for The Living
is presented and explored through the
Environment (http://www.p12.nysed.gov/ciai/ examination of empirical evidence from
mst/sci/ls.html) . Intended for the students
a mulitidisciplinary prospective including
in the MAT Science and MALS programs.
insights from ethnology, human social and
This course has an associated fee. Please see
sexual behavior, evolutionary biology, history,
www.stonybrook.edu/course fees for more
economics, the humanities and political
information.
science.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
developmental genetics, cancer genetics,
epigenetics with emphasis on areas with
emerging new insight. The methodology used
to study these areas will also be explored.
Intended for students in the MAT Biology and
PhD Science Education programs.

CSM 549: Laboratory Science
Curriculum Development
Development of curriculum materials
appropriate for a secondary school biology
classroom. Students may take this course in
their second semester of the Master of Arts in
Teaching Science program.

CSM 550: Independent Study in
Biology
A research project or body of readings will be
selected with an instructor. It is expected that
participants will gain current information in a
topic of interest with applicability to middle
school or high school curriculum. Prerequisite:
Permission of instructor

CSM 554: Current Topics in
Immunology
This is a comprehensive course in
Immunology designed to be taught to
secondary school teachers and it will address
the new living environment curriculum
standards for Immunology. The proposed
course will combine lectures in Immunology
with practical laboratory exercises. Laboratory
activities will be provided that can be modified
for secondary school education. Emphasis
will be made on recent developments in
Immunology and the essential role of the
immune system in protection from infections
and cancer. Concepts to be covered include
how the immune system distinquishes
self from non-self, how it handles various
pathogens and why it sometimes fails.

1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

CSM 551: Polymerase Chain Reaction:
Theory and Practice
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) has
become an indispensable tool in biology.
PCR has revolutionized our approach to
medical diagnostics, basic research, and
forensic applications. This laboratory and
lecture course is designed to teach a solid
theoretical and practical framework for PCR,
including primer and application protocol
design, trouble-shooting, and interpretation of
results.

CSM 556: Ecology
An examination of the interactions of living
organisms with their physical and biological
environments. Special attention is given to
population dynamics and the interactions
among organisms that determine the structure,
function, and evolutionary development of
biological communities. In addition, teacher
candidates will conduct an independent
project consisting of either a research paper
or development of an ecology laboratory for a
secondary school science class.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

CSM 557: Forensic Science
Forensic science is focused upon the
application of scientific methods and
techniques to crime and law. In this course,
scientific methods specifically relevant to
crime detection and analysis will be presented.
Emphasis is placed upon understanding
the science behind the techniques used in
evaluating physical evidence. Science MAT
students or permission of the instructor.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSM 560: Life Sciences for Grades 5-8
This is an integrated lab/lecture course
designed to increase confidence and
enthusiasm while building fundamental
knowledge of middle-level science teaching
and learning in the Life Sciences. Topics
include chemical basis of life (biochemistry),
cell structure and function, vital life process
(respiration and photosynthesis), genetics,
evolution and ecology. This course includes
standards-based curriculum design and
research-based teaching strategies as well as
hands on laboratory experiences. It focuses
on developing and presenting inquiry-based
lessons designed to encourage students
to investigate science using educational
technologies to support science lessons,
integrated other subject matter areas with
science, designing differentiated lesson that
include all students in learning science, and
assessing student understanding of science and
the nature of science.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSM 562: Chemistry for the Pre-High
School Teacher
This course provides participants with the
necessary chemistry content needed to teach
physical science applications at the upper
elementary and middle school levels. The New
York State Science and Learning Standards
(NYSSLS) are utilized to provide a structure
for the topics that teachers are required to
teach within the new standards. In addition, the
science and engineering practices and crosscutting concepts addressed in NYSSLS are
integrated within the discussion of chemistry
content. During each lesson, chemical safety
requirements are addressed and discussed. This
course is designed to provide teachers with
chemistry content required for the disciplinary
core ideas of the NYSSLS standards through
integration of activities, hands on learning and
reading assignments.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSM 599: Graduate Research in
Science Education

58

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Research to be supported by a faculty member
in the Program in Science Education.
Prerequisite: Permission required.
Fall, 1-9 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CSM 600: History and Philosophy of
Science Education
An introduction to the history of the field of
science education and the related philosophical
underpinnings. The course will survey the
major events, ideas and philosophies and how
these have changed over time. Particular focus
will be on the time period from 1890 to the
present day.
Offered
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSM 610: The Nature and Practice of
Science
An overview of the nature and practice of
science through the analysis of current issues
in science. Through the extensive use of
case studies, students will address questions
such as: What is science? What distinguishes
science from other ways of knowing?
What standards of evidence and scientific
explanations, processes, and conventions
are used in science? What philosophical,
social, ethical, and historical perspectives are
important in understanding science?
Offered
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
CSM 620: Science Teacher Education
Introduction to the historical, philosophical
and pedagogical issues surrounding science
teacher education. Introduction to the nature
of the research that has been conducted on
teacher education in the past and current
trends.
Offered
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
CSM 630: Science Education Research
Seminar
Introduction to the major theoretical
frameworks and paradigms in societal issues
(gender, culture, and diversity). Students will
be required to critique research papers in the
field and will conduct a literature review in
their general thesis area.
Offered
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
CSM 635: Qualitative Research
Methods in Science Education

Spring 2021
Introduction to qualitative research methods in
science education including a) its purposes, b)
data collection techniques, c) methods of data
analysis, and d) preparing appropriate research
reports.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
CSM 640: Directed Study in Science
Education
In their fifth semester students will
individually complete a directed study with a
faculty advisor. The intent of this course is to
prepare the students for the doctoral qualifying
examination and assist them in refining their
research topics.
Offered
Fall and Spring, 3-9 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CSM 645: Introduction to Quantitative
Research Methods
This course will provide doctoral student with
an introduction to various quantitative research
methods (non-experimental, experimental,
and quasi-experimental designs) and the
corresponding data analysis/statistical
procedures used for conducting empirical
research in science education. Appropriate
statistical analysis associated with each
research method will be discussed and SPSS
assignments included. Students will develop
a research proposal for a peer reviewed
conference of journal.

Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(GS); major portion of the research will
take place off Campus, but in U.S. and/or
U.S. provinces.All international students
must enroll in one of the graduate student
insurance plans and should be advised by an
International Advisor.
Fall, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
CSM 701: Dissertation Research Off
Campus-International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(GS). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
in MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to be
removed. International students who are not in
their home
country are charged for the mandatory
health insurance (if they are to be covered
by another insurance plan they must file a
waiver be second week of classes. The charge
will only be removed if other plan is deemed
comparable); all international students must
receive clearance from an International
Advisor.
Fall, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

CST

CSM 650: Introduction to Measurement
and Assessment in Science Education
CSM 650: Introduction to Measurement and
Assessment in Science Education. 3 Credits.
Introduction to core standards, concepts,
and empirical methods in educational
measurement and assessment; introduction
to the development, use, and evaluation of
measurement instruments in science education.
Semesters Offered: Fall and Spring

Cultural Studies

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
CSM 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5); major portion of the research will take
place on SB campus, at Cold Spring Harbor;
or at Brookhaven National Lab. Semesters
offered:
Fall, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
CSM 700: Dissertation Research Off
Campus-Domestic

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

CST 502: Theories in Cultural Studies
This course examines the role of theory in the
practice of cultural studies. 3 credits.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
CST 510: History of Cultural Studies
This course will examine the intellectual and
disciplinary stakes of raising the question,
"what is Cultural Studies?" The intention is
not so much to define Cultural Studies as to
study the polemics and histories that sparked
its delineations.
Offered Fall/
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
CST 597: Directed Readings for M.A.
Students
A student and faculty member agree on a
corpus of texts to read and discuss at weekly
or biweekly meetings. The reading list must be
59

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

filed with the program's form before the add/
drop period ends. May be repeated for credit.

themselves to full or part-time preparation for
the Comprehensive Examination.

Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

Fall and Spring, 3-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated 6 times FOR credit.

CST 598: Thesis Research
Research and writing of M.A. thesis
supervised by faculty advisor.

CST 698: Practicum in Teaching
The course is divided into two parts: one half
is normally given in the fall, one in the spring.
The first part deals primarily with matters of
pedagogy. The second part is designed to help
students plan their own undergraduate courses.
The practicum is required of all students
during their first year.

Offered Fall, Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
CST 599: Independent Study
A student and faculty member agree on a topic
not offered in any seminars and a reading
list to study at weekly or biweekly meetings.
A final research paper or major annotated
bibliography will be required. The syllabus
must be filed with the program's form before
the add/drop period ends. May be repeated for
credit. Only three credits of Independent Study
can be counted toward the M.A. requirements,
and a maximum of six toward the Ph.D
Offered
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CST 609: Advanced Topics in Cultural
Studies
A variable topics seminar in Cultural Studies.
3 Credits, Letter graded (A,A-,B+,etc.) Course
may be repeated as topics vary. Semesters
Offered: Fall and Spring
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CST 680: Cultural Studies Research
Seminar
In addition to readings on issues, debates, and
problems within the profession and field of
Cultural Studies students will develop research
for publication while engaging with practices
of professionalization.
Offered Fall/
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
CST 690: Directed Readings for
Doctoral Candidates
A student and faculty member agree on a
corpus of texts to read and discuss at weekly
or biweekly meetings. The reading list must be
filed with the program's form before the add/
drop period ends. May be repeated for credit.
Fall and Spring, 1-12 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
CST 696: Self-Directed Readings
For doctoral students who have completed
all course requirements and wish to dedicate

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
CST 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Prerequisite: Advancement to candidacy (G5).
A portion of dissertation research must take
place on SBU campus.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.
CST 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
CST 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
in MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.
All international students must received
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

CST 800: SUMMER RESEARCH
May be repeated for credit.
CST 850: SUMMER TEACHING
May be repeated for credit.

CWL
Creative Writing and Literature
CWL 500: Introduction to Graduate
Writing
A seminar that introduces students to one
another, the faculty, the program in Writing
and Literature, and to issues in contemporary
writing. Offered in conjunction with the
Writers Reading Series. Students will attend
the regular series of readings sponsored by the
Writing program and meet at weekly intervals
under the direction of a faculty advisor to
discuss and write about topics raised in the
lecture series, as well as issues generated from
seminar discussions.
Offered Fall, Spring, 3-4 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
CWL 510: Forms of Fiction
Regular submission, discussion, and analysis
of students' work in one or more of the modes
of fiction, including the short story, the
novella, and the novel. Writing assignments
may include exercises, imitations, responses,
and original work. Students will examine
relevant works that illustrate point of view,
character development, dialogue, plot, setting,
theme, motif, and other aspects of fiction.
Specific mode or topic to be studied will be
announced in the course schedule.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor and/or
departmental consent
Offered Fall, Spring, 3-4 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CWL 520: Forms of Poetry
Regular submission, discussion, and analysis
of students' work in one or more of the modes
of poetry. Writing assignments may include
exercises, imitations, responses, and original
work. Students will examine relevant works
that illustrate structural principles, metrical and
syntactical rhythm, sound and rhyme, formal
and stanzaic organization, the use of figurative
language, and other aspects of poetry.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor and/or
Program Director
Offered Fall, Spring, 3-4 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

60

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
CWL 530: Forms of Scriptwriting
Regular submission, discussion, and analysis
of students' work in one or more of the
contemporary modes of scriptwriting,
including writing for film, theater, radio,
and television. Writing assignments may
include exercises, imitations, responses, and
original work. Students will examine relevant
works that illustrate point of view, character
development, dialogue, plot, setting, and other
techniques vital to scriptwriting. Specific mode
or topic to be studied will be announced in the
course schedule.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor and/or
departmental consent
Offered Fall, Spring, 3-4 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CWL 535: Writing in Multiple Genres
Regular submission, discussion, and analysis
of students' work in two or more genres of
creative writing. Topics include Truth and
Humor; Three Characters in Search of an
Author; Imagining What You Know; What
We Write About When We Write About
Love; Fiction, Fact and the Heart of the Story;
Writing about Place; Writing Everything; and
Writing on Location. Semesters Offered: Fall
& Spring Campus: Manhattan & Southampton

Spring 2021
organizations. Writing assignments may
include exercises, imitations, responses, and
original work. Students will examine relevant
works that illustrate the strategies available in
modern professional communication. Specific
mode or topic to be studied will be announced
in the course schedule.

nationally distinguished authors who join
the department's summer faculty. Graduate
students in the program will assist in planning
and running the Conference, and will have
the option of taking a Conference workshop
for credit. The Writers Conference will also
encourage participation by visiting students
¿ new writers, established writers, teachers of
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor and/or
writing and editors ¿ who will be admitted by
departmental consent
Offered Fall, Spring, 3-4 credits, Letter graded application and may receive academic credit
upon request.
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

CWL 560: Topics in Literature for
Writers
A seminar for writers concentrating on the
study of one area of literary study, to be
announced in the course schedule. The course
may examine a contemporary or historical
trend in literature, the rise of a specific genre,
a social issue expressed in literature, an
issue in literary theory, or any other topic of
relevance and concern to students of writing.
The emphasis will be on scholarly analysis.

CWL 580: Practicum in Arts
Administration
Practicum in Arts Administration Under the
guidance of a faculty advisor, students will
learn the essentials of Arts administration.
This may include assisting in the coordination
of reading and lecture series, conference
organization, or other writing and arts
administration activities. 1-4 Credits. May be
repeated for credit Prerequisites: Permission of
Offered Fall, Spring, 3-4 credits, Letter graded instructor and program director SEMESTER:
On Demand
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

CWL 565: Special Topics in Writing
A seminar concentrating on a specific topic
or concern in writing. The particular theme
3-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
of the course will be announced in the course
May be repeated for credit.
schedule. Topics may include, among others,
CWL 540: Forms of Creative Nonfiction studies of character development, the uses
of humor, writing about place, finding one's
Regular submission, discussion, and analysis
voice, and narrative style. Written work will be
of students' work in one or more of the
supported by the reading of related texts.
contemporary fields of non-fiction writing,
including biography, autobiography, memoir,
Offered Fall, Spring, 3-4 credits, Letter graded
expository writing, and social commentary.
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
Writing assignments may include exercises,
May be repeated for credit.
imitations, responses, and original work.
CWL 570: Advanced Writing Workshop
Students will examine relevant works that
illustrate the methods and techniques available The focus is on work in progress and the
to the non-fiction writer. Specific mode or
extension of the manuscript. The workshop
topic to be studied will be announced in the
is open to students interested in any form
course schedule.
of writing. Students are encouraged to
pursue their own writing interests while
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor and/or
simultaneously being exposed to the work of
departmental consent
others in varying genres. Regular writing is
Spring, 3-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
required, and vigorous analysis and discussion
etc.)
are encouraged. Strongly recommended for
May be repeated for credit.
students preparing for the thesis.
CWL 550: Forms of Professional and
Offered Fall, Spring, 3-4 credits, Letter graded
Scientific Writing
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
Regular submission, discussion, and analysis
May be repeated for credit.
of students' work in one or more of the
CWL 575: Writers Conference
contemporary modes of professional writing,
including technological writing, writing
The Southampton Writers Conference
about science, and writing for advertising,
is an intensive program of workshops in
business, and public relations, as well as for
contemporary writing that includes lectures,
governmental, educational, and professional
readings, workshops, and panels featuring
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

1-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CWL 581: Practicum in Teaching
Writing
Students take the seminar in conjunction with
teaching a section of first year composition.
This course provides hands-on experience and
instruction in the basics of writing pedagogy,
including designing writing assignments,
sequencing assignments, motivating writing,
writing skill development and evaluating
writing. Students will also be given a
preliminary overview of the major theories
driving composition pedagogy. 3 Credits.
Prerequisites: Permission of instructor and
program director SEMESTER: On Demand
1-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CWL 582: Practicum in Publishing and
Editing
Under the guidance of the faculty advisor,
students will be exposed to the hands-on
process of editing and publishing a literary
journal.
Offered Fall, Spring, 1-4 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
CWL 588: Independent Study
Independent studies in topics chosen by the
student are arranged through an individual
instructor.
1-6 credits, S/U grading
61

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

A practicum in the ancient Indian philosophy
of yoga approached from the somatic
CWL 599: Thesis
perspective of equally conditioning the
physical, psychical, and discriminating
Every student in the M.F.A. program in
mental body. Moments of harmonious action
Writing must complete a thesis that is a
within the human system will be investigated
publishable, book-length work. It may be
through the physical challenges of Hatha
fiction, non-fiction, poetry, or a script for the
Yoga. Participants will learn dynamic
visual media. It may be a collection of short
movement sequences, static poses, and
pieces. Its subject matter may be scientific
breathing techniques, as they relate to the
or literary. It may be business-oriented or
varied historical lineages from India. The
academic. The thesis is judged solely on the
quality of its intelligence and its writing. Every student will gain experiential knowledge of
student will, with the assistance of the program yoga as used for healing pain, improving body
director, choose a thesis supervisor to provide image through somatic awareness, prevention
of mental and physical disease, muscular
guidance and criticism in the completion of
control, and as training to balance strenth and
the project. At the same time that the thesis
flexibility. Although the course will focus
supervisor is chosen, the program director
primarily on the physical experience, related
will also guide the student in the selection
texts will be used to contextualize modern
of a thesis committee, which will consist
practices and familiarize the student with the
of the thesis supervisor, one other member
extent of varied methodologies available.
of the faculty in Writing, and one outside
reader knowledgeable in the student's field of
Offered Fall and
interest. Progress toward the completion of the Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
thesis will be reviewed not only by the thesis
etc.)
supervisor but also by members of the thesis
committee, at which point student will submit DAN 568: Dance Improvisation
a bound copy of the thesis to the department. 1 The practice and movement investigation
- 9 Credits.
through discipline, spontaneity, and awareness.
Skills in improvisation will be developed
1-9 credits, S/U grading
through creative projects and experiments in
May be repeated for credit.
dance.
CWL 600: Post MFA Creative Writing
Prerequisite: DAN 165, 166, or 167
Fellow
Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
CWL 600 provides students who have
etc.)
successfully completed the MFA in Creative
Writing and Literature degree requirements
access to an intellectual community of writers.
Participants will be allowed to participate in
Data and Computational
one workshop or course per semester on a
space available basis. The program office will Science
communicate with enrollees prior to the start
DCS 501: Quantum Computing and
of the semester the workshops and courses
Applications
available.
This course is an introduction to and survey
S/U grading
of the Quantum Computing, an emerging
May be repeated for credit.
interdisciplinary field of science which has the
CWL 800: Summer Research
potential to revolutionize computation over
the next ten years, to transform chemistry,
Independent reading, writing, research on
topics or problems related to work on the MFA medicine, engineering and communications,
as well as to change our understanding
Thesis.
of physical world. The course will build
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor and/or
intuitive approach to quantum computation
program director
and algorithms, but also will advance relevant
Summer, S/U grading
vocabulary and skills for faculties and
May be repeated for credit.
graduate students in engineering, computing,
applied mathematics, chemistry, physics and
related sciences. The key questions of the
quantum computing will be introduced. How
Dance
to describe quantum systems and quantum
operations? What is a quantum computer
DAN 501: Yoga and Somatics
and what are the limits of quantum power?
What is the difference between classical and
May be repeated for credit.

DCS

DAN

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

quantum computation? Quantum teleportation?
Quantum entanglement and supersposition?
How to mitigate errors and decoherence
and transmit information through noisy
channels? What are business applications
and engineering challenges of the quantum
computers? What are the gains in running
quantum vs. classical algorithms? What are
the physical principles of the current quantum
computers hardware and what are technology
requirements for realistic quantum computers?
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
DCS 521: Introduction to
Computational and Data Science
This course provides a foundation of
knowledge and basic skills for the successful
application in graduate research of modern
techniques in computational and data science
relevant to engineering, the humanities, and
the physical, life and social sciences. It is
consciously crafted to provide a rich, projectoriented, multidisciplinary experience that
establishes a common vocabulary and skill
set. Centered around the popular programming
language Python, the course will serve as an
introduction to programming including data
structures, algorithms, numerical methods,
basic concepts in computer architecture,
and elements of object-oriented design.
Also introduced will be important concepts
and tools associated with the analysis and
management of data, both big and small,
including basic statistical modeling in R,
aspects of machine learning and data mining,
data management, and visualization. No
previous computing experience is assumed.
Students are assumed to have taken some
introductory courses in two of these three
math subjects: linear algebra, calculus, and
probability.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
DCS 522: Introduction to Scientific
Programming in C++
This course provides students with
foundational skills and knowledge in
practical scientific programming relevant
for scientists and engineers. The primary
language is C + + since it is a widely used, object-oriented language, includes
C as a subset, and is a powerful tool for
writing robust, complex, high-performance
software. Elements of Python, Bash, and other
languages will be introduced to complement
the capabilities of C++, and essential tools
for software development and engineering
will be employed throughout the course
(e.g. makefiles, version control, online code
repositories, debugging, etc.).
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

62

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
DCS 525: Fundamentals of Computing
Introduction to several modern approaches
for developing computer programs
and their use to to solve mathematical
problems. It will cover the fundamentals of
programming in MATLAB, Python, and C/C
++, including scripting, basic data structures,
algorithms, scientific computing, performance
optimization, software engineering and
program development tools. No previous
programming experience is required. This is
a project-based, 3-credit course. Homework
projects will focus on using computation
to solve mathematical problems (e.g. linear
algebra and differential equations), data
management, data analysis, etc.

Spring 2021
DCS 581: Phase Transformations
Thermodynamics and kinetics of solid
state phase transformations. Mathematical
formulation of equilibrium conditions and
application to multicomponent homogenous/
heterogeneous systems using chemical
potential surfaces and free energy diagrams.
Common tangent construction involving
multiphase equilibria and miscibility
gaps. Kinetics of phase transformations
including classical nucleation theory followed
by diffusion and diffusionless growth
mechanisms.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

DCS 697: Computational Linguistics 2
An introduction to the theoretical foundation
of computational linguistics. The course
DCS 544: Computational Methods in
emphasizes the importance of algorithms,
Physics and Astrophysics
algebra, logic, and formal language theory in
An introduction to procedural and objectthe development of new tools and software
oriented programming in a high-level language applications. Empirical phenomena in
such as C++ or modern Fortran with examples phonology and syntax are sampled from a
and assignments consisting of rudimentary
variety of languages to motivate and illustrate
algorithms for problems in physics and
the use of concepts such as strictly local string
astronomy. Students will use the UNIX/
languages, tree transducers, and semirings.
Linux operating system to write programs and Students will develop familiarity with the
manage data, and the course will include an
literature and tools of the field.
introduction to parallel computing and good
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
programming practices such as version control
and verification. The course will prepare
students for courses in algorithms and methods
that assume a knowledge of programming.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

DPA

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
DCS 569: Bayesian Data Analysis and
Computation
An applied course in Bayesian data analysis
and hierarchical modeling for advanced
graduate students in Ecology& Evolution
or related sciences. Topics will include
probability theory, Bayesian analysis, and
MCMC methods such as Gibbs sampling and
Metropolis-Hastings sampling, as well as
applied issues regarding the choice of prior
distributions, posterior convergence, censored
and missing data, and model checking and
comparison. The course will be taught
using WinBUGS and JAGS as accessed via
the R packages R2WinBUGS and R2jags,
respectively.
4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
DCS 572: Geophysical Simulation
Basic equations and boundary conditions.
Linear and nonlinear instabilities. Finite
difference and time integration techniques
for problems in geophysical fluid dynamics.
Numerical design of global atmospheric and
ocean models.

Doctoral Program in
Anthropological Sciences

DPA 501: Development of
Anthropological Theory
Survey of the development of anthropological
theory from the 19th century to the present.
This course is offered as both ANT 501 and
DPA 501.
Spring, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
DPA 502: Social Ecology
This course explores theoretical and
methodological issues in the study of
human social activity and its relationship
to ecological systems and the environment.
Readings include both classic studies as well
as contemporary research, with particular
emphasis placed on the various dimensions
and scales of social organization and activity,
and on the role of cultural, religious, and
political institutions in shaping ecological
relationship as well as economic behavior.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
DPA 503: Social Organization

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

This course explores theoretical models
and empirical observations of human social
organization in a comparative perspective,
including such topics as demography and
behavioral ecology, kinship and marriage,
reciprocal exchange, and political dimensions
of resource mobilization in small-scale as
well as complex societies. Organized around
different layers of human sociality, the
course examines social dependence among
humans and nonhuman primates, evolutionary
explanations for human mating strategies,
cooperation in child-rearing, paradigms of
descent and affinity, and the dynamics of
hierarchy and alliance in egalitarian cultures as
well as stratified states.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
DPA 505: Vertebrate Paleontology &
Paleoecology of the Turkana Basin
Vertebrate fossils are important sources of
information about the appearance, evolution,
and extinction of major organisms. As
such, they provide a valuable window onto
changes in climate and selection pressures,
and organisms' diverse adaptive responses to
these changes. They are also significant in
placing hominid discoveries within a relative
local chronology, and helping reconstruct
environments associated with hominid
fluids. This course acquaints students with
laboratory and field methods of paleontology
employed in different chronological contexts
of the Turkana Basin, used to solve diverse
theoretical questions. Graded work includes
fieldwork and lab assignments, independent
research assignments, quizzes and a final
exam. Semesters offered- Fall and Spring.
Components- laboratory, lecture, and
recitation.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
DPA 509: Seminar in European
Ethnography
Investigation and discussion of selected topics
and problems concerning European societies
and cultures. The perspectives of culture
history and current fieldwork are employed.
This course is offered as both ANT 509 and
DPA 509.
Fall, 3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
DPA 511: Paleolithic Archaeology
A survey of the archaeological record of
foraging peoples in Africa, Europe, and
Asia prior to the emergence of agriculture.
The course emphasizes particular problems
including the relationship between behavioral
and biological change, different adaptive
strategies in temperate and tropical zones, the
origins of modern humans, and the emergence
63

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
of complex hunter-gatherer societies. This
course is offered as both ANT 511 and DPA
511.
Prerequisite: Any other archaeology course.
Fall, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring 2021
archaeology and to examine in detail some
of the pertinent research topics being studied
today. This course is offered as both ANT 515
and DPA 515.
Fall, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

DPA 512: Comparative Civilizations
A comparative study of the processes of
sociocultural evolution from the beginnings
of sedentary life to the achievement of early
civilization in the Near East, Egypt, the
Indus Valley, China, Mesoamerica, and the
Andean area. The seminar covers such topics
as urbanization, demography, irrigation,
craft specialization, militarism, and trade and
exchange. This course is offered as both ANT
512 and DPA 512.

DPA 516: Research Design in
Archaeology
An examination of the ways in which
archaeologists develop successful research
strategies for arriving at answers to the key
questions in the field. Students will analyze
grant proposals that received funding from
the major sources of funding for archaeology
before developing research proposals of their
own. The aim of the course is to provide the
class with the skills needed to plan their future
Prerequisite: Graduate standing or permission and compete successfully for funding both for
their thesis research and in their future careers.
of instructor
Spring, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

Fall, alternate years, 4 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)

DPA 513: Origins of Agriculture
This course will trace the history of
anthropological thought on the origins of
agriculture and will assess the evidence from
the Old and New worlds for this economic
revolution. The course will not only explore
areas where early agriculture is evidenced, but
will also contrast these areas with those where
agriculture was a later development. Emphasis
will be on the environmental, technological,
biological, social, and cultural processes
associated with the "Neolithic Revolution."
This course is offered as both ANT 513 and
DPA 513.

DPA 517: Primitive Technology
An introduction to the technology of
hunter-gatherers. The course examines how
archaeologists use both ethnographic and
experimentation to shed light on prehistoric
human technological adaptations. Techniques
for making and using primitive tools are
practiced in weekly laboratory sessions.

Fall, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
DPA 514: Human Osteology
A detailed study of the anatomy of the
human skeleton with special emphasis on
the interpretation of skeletal remains from
archaeological contexts. Consideration is
given to the growth, structure, and function
of bones, and to forensic aspects such as
the determination of age, sex, stature, and
pathology from skeletal remains. Students
conduct a research project on a human
skeleton. Prerequisites: Previous course in
human or vertebrate anatomy and permission
of instructor. Alternate years, 4 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
DPA 515: Theory and Method in
Archaeology
Theoretical and methodological approaches
employed in archaeology. The goals of the
course are to provide an historical perspective
on the growth of theory and method in

DPA 520: Principles of Social and
Cultural Anthropology
Concepts and principles of social and cultural
anthropology; historical background, structure
and function, social processes, transactions,
culture, communication, continuity, and other
change; topics and problems of contemporary
interest. Some ethnographic monographs are
discussed in terms of their relevance to the
general concepts and principles treated in the
seminar. This course is offered as both ANT
520 and DPA 520.
Fall, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
DPA 525: Research Areas in
Anthropological Sciences
An overview of the current research areas of
the Anthropological Sciences as represented
in the IDPAS. All first-year students of
Anthropological Sciences are expected to
participate. Semesters Offered: Fall Grading:
S/U
0-2 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.

DPA 526: The Use of Remote Sensing
and GIS in Environmental Analysis
An introduction to the use of aerial and
satellite imagery in environmental analysis and
the manipulation of geographic data sets of all
types using Geographic Information Systems.
Fall, alternate years, 4 credits, Letter graded
This course is designed to teach students
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
in archaeology, physical anthropology,
May be repeated for credit.
and related disciplines, how satellite
DPA 518: Lithic Technology
imagery combined with various maps can be
manipulated using GIS software to perform
A detailed overview of the methods
powerful geographic analysis. Although
archaeologists use to extract behavioral
students are eventually likely to use these
information from prehistoric stone tools.
tools in many different parts of the world, this
The course examines raw material economy,
course focuses on Long Island as a research
technological strategies, tool use, and discard
area, and each student designs and completes
behavior. Analytical methods are practiced
through the computer-assisted analysis of stone a research project on a particular section of
the area, focusing on the habitats of local
tools from simulated archaeological sites.
wildlife, the locations of archaeological sites,
Spring, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
coastal regimes, etc. This course presumes
etc.)
computer literacy and familiarity with database
management. Offered as ANT 526 and DPA
DPA 519: Archaeozoology
526 or HPH 658.
An introduction to the study of animal bones
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
from archaeological sites. Special emphasis
etc.)
is on identification of fragmented bone,
identification of bone surface modification,
DPA 527: Field Methods and
calculation of indexes of abundance, and
measurement and metrical analysis of mammal Techniques in Archaeology
The course will be held during the summer
bone. Computer analysis is stressed, and the
only. It consists of field and laboratory work
class seeks to synthesize traditional archaeozoology and actualistic studies. This course is on an aspect of Long Island's archaeological
heritage. Students' time is divided between
offered as both ANT 519 and DPA 519.
Fall, odd years, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, surveying and excavation in the field and
artifact analysis in the laboratory. Such
B+, etc.)
techniques as map and air photo reading,
survey, instruments, stratigraphy, conservation,

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

64

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

typology construction, etc. are taught.
Students are exposed to the full range of
excavation, survey, and laboratory methods
and techniques. This course is offered as both
ANT 527 and DPA 527.

methodological approaches archaeologists use
to study food in the past.

Prerequisite: Graduate standing or permission
of instructor
Summer, even years, 3-9 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)

DPA 560: Ancient Mesopotamia
An examination of the cultural history of
Mesopotamia based on the archaeological,
textual and art historical record. Focusing
on the fourth through second millennia,
this course investigates both the long term
developmental process of this civilization,
and ways to understand its settlement
systems, urban structure, social and political
organization, economic structure and the role
played by religion.

DPA 536: Advanced Biostatistics and
Phylogenetic Comparative Methods
The course will give an overview of
fundamental biostatistical approaches in R.
The first 6 courses give students in-depth
knowledge about developing quantitative
research designs using standard parametric,
non-parametric and data reduction analyses in
R. The next 8 courses introduce phylogenetic
comparative analyses, including approached
to account for phylogenetic relatedness in
standard parametric tests and ways to infer
the evolutionary history of traits using rate
analysis. Students are expected to become
proficient in R programming. The course will
involve substantial preparation and included 10
take-home assignments.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
DPA 541: Evolutionary Anatomy
A lecture and laboratory with emphasis on
dissection of the entire human body. Includes
functional and comparative anatomy with
special emphasis on the musculoskeletal
morphology of humans and higher primates.
This course is offered as both DPA 541 and
HBA 541.
Prerequisite: permission of instructor
Fall, 8 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
DPA 550: Theory and Methodology in
Primatology
Comprehensive overview of the theory and
methodology used in the study of primate
behavioral ecology. Includes ecological field
methods, behavioral observations, analytical
techniques, nonparametric statistics as well as
planning, presenting, and reviewing research.
Offered as both ANT 550 and DPA 550.
Fall, even years, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
DPA 559: Archaeology of Food
Explores the archaeological study of food
and foodways. The emphasis is on the social
aspects of food, particularly its roles in
past power structures, social relationships,
conceptions of identity, ritual practices, and
gender roles. Also covers the theoretical and

Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)

fossil record and structural and chemical
evidence. Emphasis on primates prior to the
origin of the human lineage. This course is
offered as ANT 564, DPA 564 and HBA 564.
Spring, even years, 4 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
DPA 565: Human Evolution
A survey of the fossil record of hominid
evolution through the Pliocene and Pleistocene
with emphasis on the morphological structure
and function of locomotor, masticatory,
and neural systems. Includes utilization of
comparative anatomical material and an
extensive cast collection. This course is offered
as ANT 565, DPA 565 and HBA 565.

Fall, alternate years, 4 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)

Fall, even years, 4 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)

DPA 561: Peasant Societies and
Cultures
The concept of peasantry is examined from
political, religious, and social class viewpoints
as well as from the more traditional economic
view. These agricultural peoples, who are
essentially preliterate and preindustrial, are
described and analyzed especially in relation
to the national societies of which they form a
part. This course is offered as both ANT 561
and DPA 561.

DPA 566: Studies in Functional
Morphology
Introduction to the theory and methods of
functional morphology. Various methods of
analysis and the application of experimental
techniques such as electromyography or bone
strain analysis are discussed as they pertain to
the understanding of the interaction between
form and function. Special emphasis is placed
on the analysis of human and nonhuman
primate morphology, and the application of
this analysis to interpretation of the fossil
evidence for human and nonhuman primate
evolution. This course is offered as both HBA
566 and DPA 566.

Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
DPA 562: Long Island Archaeology
Life on Long Island and the surrounding
area from its first settlement by Native
Americans 12,000 years ago until the end of
the nineteenth century. Trends and changes in
human behavior are studied in the context of
environmental and cultural processes affecting
all of northeastern North America.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
DPA 563: Aspects of Animal
Mechanics
An introduction to biomechanics. Covers
freebody mechanics and kinetics as applied to
vertebrate locomotion. Considers the structure
and physiology of muscle as it relates to
adaptations of the musculoskeletal system.
This course is offered as both HBA 563 and
DPA 563.
Prerequisites: Introductory physics and
biology or permission of instructor.
Spring, odd years, 2 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
DPA 564: Primate Evolution
The taxonomic relationships and evolutionary
history of primates as documented by their

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.
Spring, even years, 2 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
DPA 567: Primate Behavior and
Ecology
A comparative approach to the behavior
and ecology of living lemurs, monkeys, and
apes. Emphasis is placed on sociobiological
theory; life history strategies; morphological
adaptations; comparisons of primate
communities in Asia, Africa, Madagascar, and
South America; and primate conservation. This
course is offered as both ANT 567 and DPA
567.
Fall, odd years, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
DPA 568: Hunters and Gatherers
The course focuses on the relationship between
ecology and adaptation to explore the crosscultural diversity of hunter/gatherers. The
first part of the course looks at a number of
key theoretic issues and debates that surround
the study of hunter/gatherers. Once this
foundation is laid, students learn about modern
and historic hunter-gatherers from all the
65

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
major geographic regions of the world. This
overview draws on studies from behavioral
ecology, ethnoarchaeology and cultural
anthropology. The focus of the course is
both to explore hunter/gatherer variation
in relationship to their environment, and to
give students an appreciation of the ways in
which hunter-gatherers have been historically
documented. The course is designed to be
applicable to archaeologists, anthropologists
and to those in other disciplines who make
inferences about past ways of life.
Spring, 3-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
DPA 573: Archaeology of Human
Dispersals
A survey of the archaeological evidence for
the dispersal of Homo sapiens during the Late
Pleistocene epoch (128,000-130,000 years
ago). Topics include African origin of Homo
sapiens, dispersals into Eurasia, Australia,
and the Americas, large mammal extinctions,
origins of art, music, and symbolic behavior,
emergence of hunter-gatherers.
Offered
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
DPA 582: Comparative Anatomy of
Primates
The comparative anatomy of living primates.
Laboratory dissection with emphasis on
relating structural diversity to behavior and
biomechanics. This course is offered as both
HBA 582 and DPA 582.
Prerequisites: HBA 364 and previous
course in human or vertebrate anatomy and
permission of instructor.
Spring, alternate years, 4 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
DPA 583: Human Demography
The study of human demography has had
a long standing focus in anthropology,
archaeology, economics and sociology for
the simple reason that the distribution and
density of people fundamentally shapes
many other aspects of the human condition.
Human Demography gives students an
overview of population dynamics both as
they change through time and differ across
cultures. The course starts with outlining the
history of population studies. Following this
introduction, the three major components
of population change - fertility, mortality
and migration - are explored in depth. We
then survey the seminal transitions in human
demographic history from hunting and
gathering to domestication and through
modern postindustrial times. Drawing from the
ethnographic, human ecology, demographic
and archaeological literature, students read and

Spring 2021
discuss human demography from a variety of
perspectives. The course includes some simple
computations and a lab.
Spring, 3-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
DPA 585: Prehistoric Peoples of the
Americas
ANT 585 Prehistoric Peoples of the Americas
Life in the Americas from the first settlement
at the end of the Ice Age until the arrival
of the Europeans in the 15th and 16th
centuries. The culture, history, and evolution
of prehistoric peoples of North, Central,
and South America are treated. Specific
topics covered include settlement by North
Americans, hunting-gathering lifeways, plant
and animal domestication, the origins of
village life, and state-level societies.
Spring, odd years, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
DPA 591: Professional Skills in the
Anthropological Sciences, I.
An overview of the skills necessary for
scientific professionalism, with special
reference to successful performance in the
Anthropological Sciences. Topics covered
in this course include: use of basic software
tools, research design, data collection and
management, dissertation proposal and journal
article writing, oral and poster presentations,
and professional conduct. This course is not
an alternative to GRD 500. Recommended for
students of G0 through G4 status. Permission
by Instructor
0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
DPA 592: Professional Skills in the
Anthropological Sciences, II.
A development of additional professional skills
necessary to master research and teaching
in the Anthropological Sciences including
career options and employment. Topics in
this course include: the dissertation writing
process, review processes, job applications
and negotiations, tenure process, and teaching
strategies. Recommended for students of G5
status. Permission by Instructor
0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
DPA 593: Ethics in the Anthropological
Sciences
This course familiarizes students with the
major issues in the ethics of anthropological
science, research and teaching. Students
discuss scientific and academic values
and how best to comply with them in
academic, field, and laboratory environments.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Overarching research ethics topics addressed
include data management, scientific
misconduct, plagiarism, authorship, and
mentoring. This portion of the course
incorporates videos and readings from GRD
500. Anthropology-specific topics include
fieldwork, museum work, animal research, US
and international laws (biodiversity; cultural
& natural heritage), and public anthropology.
Anthropological Sciences faculty with
particular expertise in these various areas lead
these discussions.
0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
DPA 600: Practicum in Teaching
May be repeated for credit.
DPA 602: Research Seminar in
Anthropological Theory
This course is offered as both ANT 602 and
DPA 602.
Fall and Spring, 0-12 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
DPA 610: Individual Research
Research supervised by faculty. Students must
have permission of instructor and enroll in
appropriate section. This course is offered as
both ANT 610 and DPA 610.
Fall and Spring, 1-12 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
DPA 620: Research Seminar in Topical
Problems
This course is offered as both ANT 620 and
DPA 620.
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
DPA 630: Research Seminar in
Physical Anthropology
This course is offered as both ANT 630 and
DPA 630.
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
DPA 640: Research Seminar in
Ethnography and Ethnology
This course is offered as both ANT 640 and
DPA 640.
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
DPA 650: Research Seminar in
Archaeology
DPA 680: Special Seminar
Selected topics in cultural and social
anthropology. Topics reflect current interests
66

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

of faculty and graduate students. This course is
offered as both ANT 680 and DPA 680.

Economics

Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

ECO 500: Microeconomics I
The first semester of a one-year course in
microeconomic theory. Deals with decisionmaking of economic agents in different choice
environments using the analytical approach
of duality theory. Topics include theory of the
consumer, theory of the firm, decision-making
under risk and uncertainty, intertemporal
choice, aggregation, and capital theory.

DPA 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research must take
place on SBU campus, at Cold Spring Harbor,
or at the Brookhaven National Lab.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.
DPA 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
DPA 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
in MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.
All international students must received
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
DPA 800: Summer Research
This course is offered as both ANT 800 and
DPA 800.
S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

ECO

Prerequisite: Graduate standing in the
Economics Department or permission of the
Graduate Director.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ECO 501: Microeconomics II
A continuation of ECO 500, focusing
on theories of equilibrium and market
structure. Topics include general competitive
equilibrium, imperfect competition and game
theory, imperfect information, theory of public
goods, and social choice.
Prerequisite: ECO 500, Graduate standing in
the Economics Department or permission of
the Graduate Director.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ECO 510: Macroeconomics I
The first semester of a one-year course in
macroeconomic theory. Deals with theories
and determinants of income, employment, and
inflation. Topics include static equilibrium
models, theories of money demand and
monetary phenomena, theories of the
labor market and unemployment, rational
expectations and stabilization policy,
consumption, and investment.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ECO 511: Macroeconomics II
A continuation of ECO 510, focusing on
dynamic models. Topics include models
of economic growth, optimal growth and
efficiency, overlapping-generations models,
rational expectations, and optimal policy.
Prerequisite: ECO 510, Graduate standing in
the Economics Department or permission of
the Graduate Director.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ECO 520: Mathematical Statistics
The first semester of a one-year course in
quantitative methods. Statistical methods and
their properties of particular usefulness to
economists. Topics include probability theory,
univariate and multivariate distributions,
limiting distributions, point and interval
estimation, hypothesis testing.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Prerequisite: Graduate standing in the
Economics Department or permission of the
Graduate Director.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ECO 521: Econometrics
A continuation of ECO 520. The application
of mathematical and statistical methods of
economic theory, including the concept of
an explanatory economic model, multiple
regression, hypothesis testing, simultaneous
equations models, and estimating techniques.
Prerequisite: ECO 520, Graduate standing in
the Economics Department or permission of
the Graduate Director.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ECO 522: Applied Econometrics
A continuation of ECO 521. The application
and extension of econometric techniques
developed in ECO 521. Emphasis on the
relationship among economic theory,
econometric modeling and estimation, and
empirical inference. Computer usage for
calculation of estimators. Critical examination
of econometric studies in current journals.
Prerequisite: ECO 521, Graduate standing in
the Economics Department or permission of
the Graduate Director.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ECO 531: Introduction to
Computational Methods in Economics
A first course in the computational and
graphical techniques for finding numerical
solutions to a set of economic models (from
more elementary models such as Edgeworth
Box to a more general competitive equilibrium
model to finding the policy function of a
dynamic growth model) based on concepts and
constructs presented in the 1st year graduate
theory courses. Includes the foundations
of programming (using a symbolic algebra
language), and finding maxima of functions,
finding equilibria of markets, and exploring
and fitting functions graphically and through
finite difference and projection methods.
Emphasis is put on understanding the
connections between the concepts, the algebra,
the algorithm of the computation and the
graphical presentation of economic models
and on using the numerical models to perform
experiments. Prerequisites: ECO500, ECO590,
limited to Economics Department M.A.
students Offered
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ECO 590: Mathematical Foundations of
Contemporary Economic Theory

67

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
A one-semester course dealing with
mathematical concepts and techniques relevant
to economic theory. Topics in set theory,
topology, linear algebra, and optimization
theory. Applications to economic theory
developed as time permits.
Prerequisite: Graduate standing in the
Economics Department or permission of the
Graduate Director.
Fall, 0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ECO 597: Masters Project in
Economics
In this required course students will work
with an adviser of their choice to write a paper
to be submitted by the end of the semester.
This research piece will be a well-structured
and coherent article on an economic research
question in a field of the student's choice,
with some elements of originality. The paper
cannot be just an extended example that carries
out known techniques on a problem that has
known answers even if those techniques are
complicated. The approval of the master's
project advisor and the Graduate Program
Director are required to register for this class.
Offered fall and
Spring, 0-3 credits, S/U grading
ECO 599: Research in Special Topics
Prerequisite: Graduate standing in the
Economics Department or permission of the
Graduate Director.
Fall and Spring, 1-12 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ECO 604: Game Theory I
Elements of cooperative and non-cooperative
games. Matrix games, pure and mixed
strategies, and equilibria. Solution concepts
such as core, stable sets, and bargaining sets.
Voting games, and the Shapley and Banzhaff
power indices. This course is offered as both
ECO 604 and AMS 552. Prerequisite for ECO
604: Graduate standing in the Economics
Department or permission of the Graduate
Director.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ECO 605: Game Theory II
Refinements of strategic equilibrium, games
with incomplete information, repeated games
with and without complete information, and
stochastic games. The Shapley value of games
with many players, and NTU-values. This
course is offered as both ECO 605 and AMS
555.

Spring 2021
ECO 606: Advanced Topics in
Strategic Behavior in Economics
An analysis of varying topics in strategic
behavior in economics. One or more of the
following topics and others will be dealt with
each week: repeated games with incomplete
information; stochastic games; bounded
rationality complexity and strategic entropy;
values of non-atomic games; strategic aspects
in the telecommunication industry; general
equilibrium and financial markets; auction
mechanisms; knowledge, common knowledge,
and strategic equilibria.
Prerequisites: ECO 501, ECO 604, ECO 605,
or permission of instructor, Graduate standing
in the Economics Department or permission of
the Graduate Director.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ECO 610: Special Topics: Advanced
Macroeconomics Theory
Topics in macroeconomic theory, including
microfoundations of macroeconomics,
temporary general equilibrium and
disequilibrium, monetary theory, equilibrium
theory of business cycles, implicit contracts,
rational expectations, and econometric
implications. Prerequisites: ECO 501, ECO
511, Graduate standing in the Economics
Department or permission of the Graduate
Director Semesters Offered: Fall and Spring
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 3 times FOR credit.
ECO 612: Computational Economics
and Dynamic Modeling
An analysis of the theory and applications
of the dynamic modeling literature using
computational methods, and on the methods
themselves. Dynamic Modeling and
Computational Economics are possibly
the fastest growing areas of interest in the
profession due to its suitability to model, solve
and also estimate realistic decision making
problems in most areas of economics.
Prerequisite: Graduate standing in the
Economics Department or permission of the
Graduate Director
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

ECO 613: Computational
Macroeconomics
A concentration on numerical methods
commonly used to solve dynamic
macroeconomic models. These include
methods relying on dynamic programming
Prerequisite for AMS 555: AMS 552/ECO 604. techniques, linear approximation methods,
and non-linear methods that can be
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
applied to models with distortions and
etc.)
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

heterogeneous agents. The different methods
will be explained and their application to
macroeconomics will be illustrated with
examples from various areas such as Real
Business Cycles, Asset Pricing with Complete
and Incomplete Markets, and Recursive
Contracts.
Prerequisite: ECO 612, Graduate standing in
the Economics department or permission of the
Graduate Director
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ECO 615: Advanced Macroeconomics
workshop
This course is designed for PhD students
in their 2nd year and above who are
thinking about writing a dissertation in
macroeconomics. The course will provide the
students with research methods for finding
a PhD topic as well as for developing their
preliminary ideas for their dissertation topic.
The course will
involve presentations not only from faculty
members but also from students, allowing them
to obtain direct feedback and direction for
future research from all the faculty members
in macroeconomics. The course will also
provide students with reviews of the most
important literature through discussions
and presentations by the faculty members of
seminal papers in the cutting edge research
areas in macroeconomics. Some examples
of these areas are consumer bankruptcy,
Housing Markets, Social Security Reform,
Health Care reform and Tax reform. The
course will deal with stochastic, dynamic
general equilibrium models which do not have
a close form solution. Students will have to
use these models to study their question of
interest and the course will also provide them
with direction as to which numerical methods
are more appropriate to solve their particular
problems.
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ECO 623: Data Analysis and Economic
Applications
Survey of major sources of data in economics
and theoretical hypotheses and statistical
methods for organizing and analyzing such
data. Statistical models for quantitative data
as well as qualitative choices are presented.
Computer usage is expected.
Prerequisite: ECO 521; Graduate standing in
the Economics department or permission of the
Graduate Program Director.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

68

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
ECO 629: Studies in Quantitative
Methods
Prerequisite: ECO 521; Graduate standing in
the Economics department or permission of the
Graduate Program Director.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ECO 636: Industrial Organization I
Applications of microeconomic theory to the
determinants of market structure. Relationships
between market structure, firm behavior, and
allocational efficiency. Econometric estimation
and testing of some hypotheses suggested by
the theory.
Prerequisites: ECO 501, ECO 521; Graduate
standing in the Economics department or
permission of the Graduate Program Director.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ECO 637: Industrial Organization II
This course is a continuation of ECO 636.
It deals with the same questions and tools
as ECO 636, and provides an introduction
to antitrust policy and to public policy
toward industry, including regulation and
deregulation, the design of optimal regulation,
and the effectiveness of current regulation.
Prerequisites: ECO 501, ECO 521; Graduate
standing in the Economics department or
permission of the Graduate Program Director.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ECO 640: Labor Economics I
This is the first course in the graduate
sequence in labor economic theory and
empirical applications. Topics include
human capital theory, labor supply, life cycle
behaviors, and the behavioral effects of social
insurance programs. The emphasis is on up to
date treatments of these topics in the literature.
Offer
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ECO 641: Labor Economics II
This is an advanced course in labor economics
which continues ECO 640. Topics include
both theory and estimation of job search,
matching, dynamic discrete and continuous
choice models of the labor market. Special
emphasis will be given to the role of economic
theory in specification and testing econometric
models.
Offered in Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
ECO 642: Demographic Economics I
This course deals with the economics of
the family. It utilizes recently developed
techniques in economics and demography
to deal with questions concerning marriage,

Spring 2021
divorce, fertility, contraception, the
intrafamily distribution of resources, and the
intergenerational distribution of resources.
Students will do original theoretical and
empirical research under the professor's
supervision. Prerequisite: ECO 501; Graduate
standing in the Economics department or
permission of the Graduate Program Director.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ECO 643: Demographic Economics II
This course is a continuation of ECO 642.
It deals with the same questions and tools
as ECO 642, but emphasizes developing
economies. The connections between
population growth and development are
stressed.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ECO 645: Health Economics II
Critical reviews of research in health
economics topics of current interest, such as
empirical and conceptual models of physician
behavior, competition in the pharmaceutical
industry, the economic impacts of managed
care, and the causes and consequences of
unhealthy behaviors. Students will present
and critique original research and produce a
research paper on a topic of their interest..
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ECO 646: Health Economics II
Theoretical and econometric analysis of
selected aspects of the health care delivery
system, such as the demand for medical
services, the supply and distribution of
physician services, the utilization of nonphysician medical personnel, alternative
models of hospital behavior, third-party
insurance reimbursement, national health
insurance and cost, and price inflation in the
hospital and long-term care sectors. Offered as
ECO 646 or HPH 664.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ECO 647: Research Methods in
Applied Microeconomics
Presentation, discussion and analysis of
student and faculty research in the areas of
applied microeconomics, labor economics,
health economics and industrial organization,
as well as applied econometrics. The purpose
of the course is to provide skills and feedback
to students at various levels in the program
that assist them toward the completion of
their second year paper, dissertation proposals
and thesis. It is a course in research and
presentation methods that provides an effective
mechanism for learning about current areas of
research interest.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Prerequisite: Graduate standing in the
Economics Department or permission of the
Graduate Director
Fall or Spring, 0-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ECO 690: Seminar in Applied
Economics
Preparation, presentation, and discussion
of student and faculty research in applied
economics. Topics covered by student papers
are usually related to students' long-term
research interests.
Fall or Spring, 0-6 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ECO 695: Research Workshop
Designed to direct students to the selection
of dissertation topics. Oral and written
presentation of student papers with active
faculty participation. Several sections may
be offered each semester in areas of broad
research interest.
Prerequisite: Graduate standing in the
Economics department or permission of
the Graduate Program Director and three
semesters of coursework in the Ph.D. program.
Fall, 3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ECO 698: Practicum in Teaching
Prerequisite: Graduate standing in the
Economics department or permission of the
Graduate Program Director.
Spring, 0-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ECO 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Prerequisite: Have declared thesis advisor in
Economics Ph.D. program (G5). Major portion
of research must take place on SBU campus,
at Cold Spring Harbor, or at the Brookhaven
National Lab.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.
ECO 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 0-9 credits, S/U grading
69

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

May be repeated for credit.
EGL 525: 17th-Century Literature
ECO 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
in MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.
All international students must received
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 0-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ECO 800: Summer Research
Prerequisite: Pre-approved participation in
Economics dept. activity.
S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

EGL
English
EGL 501: Studies in Chaucer
EGL 502: Studies in Shakespeare
EGL 503: Studies in Milton
EGL 505: Studies in Genre
May be repeated for credit.

EGL 530: Studies in Restoration
Literature
EGL 535: Studies in Neoclassicism
EGL 540: Studies in Romanticism
EGL 545: Studies in Victorian
Literature
EGL 547: Late 19th-Century British
Literature
EGL 550: 20th-Century British
Literature
EGL 555: Studies in Irish Literature

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EGL 509: Studies in Language and
Linguistics
EGL 510: Old English Language and
Literature
EGL 515: Middle English Language
and Literature
EGL 520: Studies in the Renaissance

EGL 586: Topics in Gender Studies
Changing historical or theoretical focus on
issues in gender studies, sexuality, queer
studies, or women's writing.
Fall, Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B
+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
EGL 587: Topics in Race, Ethnic, or
Diaspora Studies
Changing historical or theoretical focus on
issues of race or ethnicity, on U.S., British, or
global ethnic literatures, or on experiences,
histories, or theories of colonization,
decolonization, empire, globalism, or diaspora.
Fall, Spring, Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

EGL 560: Studies in Early American
Literature

EGL 588: Writing Workshop
Changing focus on various forms of writing,
including poetry, drama, fiction, the essay, etc.

EGL 565: 19th-Century American
Literature

Fall, Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B
+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

EGL 570: 20th-Century American
Literature
EGL 575: British and American
Literature
EGL 582: Drama Workshop
EGL 583: Nonfiction Workshop
Participants will learn to compose, critique
and revise nonfiction forms such as essays and
memoirs, incorporating narrative techniques
that will make their work accessible and
engaging to general readerships.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

EGL 506: Studies in Literary Theory
Prerequisite: Matriculation in a graduate
program or the composition studies certificate.

Fall, Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B
+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

EGL 584: Topics in Genre Studies
Changing issues in the historical study of
particular genres, such as the novel, lyric
poetry, film, drama, etc.
Fall, Spring, Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
EGL 585: Topics in Cultural Studies
Changing issues in the interdisciplinary study
of culture, including literature, popular culture,
discourse studies, media studies, etc. Focus is
on the analysis of historical contexts and on
methods derived from contemporary cultural
theory.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

EGL 592: Problems in Teaching
Writing or Composition
This course provides an overview of writing
pedagogy as applied to tutoring in a Writing
Center or in an English classroom. Included in
the course is fieldwork in the campus Writing
Center.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EGL 593: Problems in Teaching
Literature
EGL 594: Contexts of Literary Study
EGL 597: Practicum in Methods of
Research
EGL 598: Thesis Research
Research and writing of M.A. thesis
supervised by faculty advisor.
Fall, Spring, Summer, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
EGL 599: Independent Study
May be repeated for credit.
EGL 600: Proseminar: The Discipline
of Literary Studies
Pro-seminar: Introduction to critical analysis,
including theoretical and methodological
70

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
approaches, and an orientation to the
profession both in the academy and other
careers. Faculty members will speak on their
own scholarship and professional experiences.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EGL 601: Problems in History and
Structure of the English Language
A survey of the English language from its
historical beginnings through the present.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EGL 602: Problems in Bibliography,
Editing, and Textual Criticism
An introduction to the study of manuscripts
and printed books, with special emphasis on
editorial and textual problems and decisions.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EGL 603: Problems in Literary Theory
and Criticism
A seminar on any of the current theoretical
approaches to texts.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Spring 2021
EGL 611: Critical Theory
EGL 697: Practicum in Teaching
A seminar on influential theoretical approaches English Literature
to texts.
Teaching workshop for introductory courses in
poetry, fiction, and drama.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

3 credits, S/U grading

EGL 612: Theories in Composition
This course explores the relationship between
reading and writing skills, the differences
between speech production and writing
production, and the relationship between
literacy, culture, and language politics.

EGL 698: Practicum in Teaching
Writing
This course provides hands-on experience and
instruction in the basics of writing pedagogy,
including designing writing assignments,
sequencing assignments, motivating writing,
writing skill development and evaluating
writing. Students will also be given a
preliminary overview of the major theories
driving composition pedagogy.

Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
EGL 613: Research in Composition
This course provides an introduction to the
nature of empirical research in Composition
Studies. Students will survey landmark
research studies, learn how to read research
reports critically, and conduct a mini-research
project in their own classrooms or tutoring
situations to analyze underlying causes of
students' writing problems.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

EGL 604: Problems in Literary Analysis
EGL 614: Topics in Composition and
An introduction to the explication of texts.
Writing
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
This course will consist of directed readings
May be repeated for credit.
in particular areas of interest in rhetoric, the
EGL 605: Problems in Convention and history of rhetoric and pedagogy, and teaching
strategies for teachers.
Genre
An examination of literary types and
categories.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Offered
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

EGL 615: Independent Study
EGL 606: Period and Tradition
An examination of the major issues that pertain Semesters Offered: Fall and Spring
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
to particular historical literary periods.
May be repeated for credit.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
EGL 607: Individual Authors
In depth study of specified writers, from Old
English to Contemporary World Literatures in
English.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
EGL 608: Problems in the Relationship
of Literature to Other Disciplines
This seminar will encourage the
interdisciplinary focus of our program by
examining the intersection between textual
studies and other forms of inquiry.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EGL 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Prerequisite: Advancement to candidacy (G5).
Major portion of research must take place on
SBU campus, at Cold Spring Harbor, or at the
Brookhaven National Lab.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.
EGL 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

EGL 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
EGL 620: Literary Studies Research
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
and Writing Seminar
(G5). Major portion of research will take
This course focuses on the research and
place outside of the United States and/or
writing skills necessary to submit work for
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
publication. In addition to shared readings,
students will conduct substantial new research option of the health plan and may also enroll
in MEDEX. International students who are
and expand a paper they have previously
written for a graduate seminar. Please note that in their home country are not covered by
this course cannot be taken until students have mandatory health plan and must contact the
completed at least one semester of the doctoral Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
program.
not in their home country are charged for the
3 credits,
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
EGL 690: Directed Readings
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
May be repeated for credit.
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.
EGL 695: Methods of Teaching English

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

71

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
All international students must received
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
EGL 800: SUMMER RESEARCH
May be repeated for credit.

EHM
Environmental Humanities
EHM 501: Environmental Humanities &
Ecoliteracy
This course will provide an introduction to
the multidisciplinary field of environmental
humanities through the study of ecocritical
concepts and theories, including environmental
justice, social ecology, ecofeminism, deep
ecology, conservationism, and biocentrism.
Readings will include historical, literacy, and
philosophical sources. Environmental film and
visual art will be included. Semesters offered:
Fall, Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B
+, etc.)
EHM 502: Environmental Media, Film,
Writing
An examination of a variety of genres social media; advertising; film; video;
photojournalism; fiction; children's literature;
and non-fiction - in order to understand ways
in which these texts are utilized to inform
and manipulate public opinion regarding the
environment. The culmination of the course
will be a final research project using multiple
genres. Semesters offered:
Fall, Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B
+, etc.)
EHM 503: Ecofeminism
The course will examine ecofeminist critical
theory from it's inception in the early 1970s
to the present. Ecofeminist thought will be
utilized as the lens through which students
read, research and study a wide variety of
fiction and nonfiction literature, history, film,
media and culture. Semesters Offered:
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EHM 504: Environmental Justice
This course will examine a wide range
of environmental issues such as climate
change, toxic pollution, water and food
rights, and more--within socioeconomic and
racial contexts. The course will look at how
underprivileged and nonwhite socioeconomic
communities are most adversely impacted by
environmental degradation in the U.S. and
around the world. Semesters Offered:

Spring 2021
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EHM 505: Environmental Narrative
Nonfiction
A study of the literary genre of environmental
narrative nonfiction, which includes a blend
of scientific and historical fact and creative
expression and memoir. Students will read
a wide variety of creative nonfiction and
narrative nonfiction books and articles,
research a particular environmental issue
in depth, and write their own original work
of environmental narrative nonfiction
(incorporating both their research and personal
voice). Semesters Offered:
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EHM 560: Topics in Sustainability and
Study Abroad
This course offers students the opportunity
to study abroad in a foreign setting and
learn about another culture's approaches to
environmental sustainability. The course will
focus on one or more of the following subject
areas: environmental creative writing, ecoaesthetics, renewable energy, environmental
policy and design, environmental politics
and history, environmental advocacy,
permaculture, horticulture and landscape
design. Participants will be assigned readings
and research assignments prior to departure.
Community service may be included. While
traveling abroad, student will participate in
lectures, readings, workshops, and site visits,
and the course will culminate in a research
capstone project.
3-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.

EMP
Engineering Management
EMP 501: Behavioral and
Organizational Aspects of Management
This course provides an understanding
of the management process by analyzing
organizational behavior. Topics include
behavior in two-person situations, factors
influencing attitudes and changes in
organizational behavior, group influence on
behavior, formal and informal organizational
structures, conflict and conflict resolutions,
and the dynamics of planned change.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EMP 502: Engineering Economics
This is a course in advanced cost justifications
for business and projects. The objective is
to give the student a better understanding of
what is required to justify, budget, plan and

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

carry out technological projects in industry
today. The student will also understand how
management decisions are influenced by
financial analysis when making budgetary
project plans.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EMP 504: Quantitative Methods
This course will lay the foundation for an
understanding of basic quantitative methods
for solving business questions. A working
knowledge of these quantitative methods can
help managers optimize true value-added
for company stakeholders. In this course
we will explore probability theory, decision
science and linear programming among other
basic mathematical principles as a way of
quantifying the decision-making process, but
will not forget the basics of good management.
We will also discuss several quantitative
methods for analyzing and controlling cost,
lead time, and quality of the goods or services
being produced.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EMP 506: Strategic Technology
Analysis
This course will lay the foundation for an
understanding of Operations Management
principles for Engineers. Operations
Management is the art of transforming ideas
and materials into true value-added for
company stakeholders. In this course we will
explore the entire value chain from design
to forecasting to supply chain management,
production and quality control. We will
look at the latest trends in global Operations
theory, but will not forget the basics of good
management. We will use several case studies
to get real-world experience and emphasize
situational learning. We will also discuss
several quantitative methods for analyzing and
controlling cost, lead time, and quality of the
goods or services being produced.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EMP 507: Research and Special Topics
in Global Industrial Management
An individual study course for students
investigating special topics relating to global
industrial management.
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
EMP 509: Enterprise Information and
Knowledge Systems Management
This course covers the different types of
enterprise systems, how they are used to
manage an organization's processes, reengineering the business with enterprise
systems, and the relationship among
72

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
technology, organization, and management.
Knowledge-based and web-based features in
modern enterprise systems will be emphasized.
Database Management, Security, Control,
Ethical, and Social issues of enterprise systems
will be discussed.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
EMP 511: Starting a Business Venture
This course covers the necessities of beginning
a business from turning a concept into a new
venture and developing a business plan for
a venture. Topics include how to identify
and evaluate the product and its market
potential; management and organization
issues; production and channels of distribution;
and how to present a plan to the financial
community. Specific case studies and guest
speakers are utilized.
Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
EMP 517: Quality and Value
Management
Modern management's approach to quality
has changed radically in the last 20 years;
this course explains why and how. It covers
methods used by both manufacturing and
service organizations to achieve high quality:
how each organizational function is involved
in quality; how improving quality can
reduce costs; importance of communication;
importance of involving all employees; need to
measure quality; and introduction to statistical
quality control and how it is used.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
EMP 518: Technology Projects
This course will lay the foundation for
an understanding of project management
principles for Engineers. We will delve into
conflict resolution and time management
and spend a good deal of time talking about
the importance of management support
in engineering companies. Quantitative
approaches to planning, time, cost and
performance will be compared and contrasted
and critical trade-offs will be explored. Other
topics will include planning, organizing, and
controlling resources; monitoring progress
toward objectives; identifying and managing
risks; communicating effectively; setting
priorities; and writing engineering proposals.
The systems approach will be emphasized.
Finally, we will identify future trends and
take a look at various case studies that will
sharpen our problem-solving skills for when
we undergo a "live" engineering project.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring 2021
EMP 521: Developing New Products
This course covers how to manage enterprise
innovation, corporate innovation cultures,
ideation and creative thinking, product design
and development processes and phases, issues
in product design, collaboration between R&D
and operations/marketing. Also, this class will
focus on how to use forecasting to ensure the
successful launch of a technology product.
Case studies will be discussed.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EMP 522: Strategic Marketing:
Planning and Process
This course will examine the vital role that
strategic marketing and planning plays in
all businesses, as well as non-profit and
government organizations. Marketing's role
in our economy, society and the appropriate
marketing target and mix of media will also be
presented. The various careers which exist in
marketing and the structure of marketing plans
and departments are studied. The class will
create a marketing plan based on real products
and present it.

Offered
Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
EMP 530: Intro of Big Data & Data
Science for Technological Management
This course is an introduction to big data
techniques, its applications and its challenges.
We will analyze customer relationship
management processes using software
management tools such as DFD and UML and
Lean & Six Sigma management to improve
applications or services in a cloud computing
environment. Data modeling, mining and
visualization tools will be introduced for
developing business intelligence, predictive
analytics and decision support applications.
Technologies in related areas such as data
warehousing, data sharing, data security,
networking, and operating systems will also
be included to support big data applications in
cloud computing environments.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

EMP 531: Data Mining for
Technological Management
Data mining can be used to extract meaningful
EMP 523: International Business and
and actionable information from large data
Management
sets and then used for business intelligence,
This course covers the world's marketplace,
predictive analytics and decision support.
international environment, managing
Supervised and unsupervised machine
international business, and managing
learning techniques, such as linear regression,
international business operations. Additional
classification, decision trees, support vector
topics include cultural issues in a global
machines, and clustering, will be discussed.
marketplace, the impact of law and legal
These techniques and associated tools will
differences in the world marketplace compared
be introduced in the context of customer
to the U.S., and addressing competitive issues
relationship management (CRM), supply chain
related to items such as a need for local
management (SCM), and global operations
contact.
management applications. Semesters Offered:
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Fall, Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B
+, etc.)
EMP 524: Modern Transportation
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Systems and Logistics
The integration of the activities that procure
materials and services, transform them into
intermediate goods and final products, and
deliver them to the customers in a global
environment. This course covers all the
logistical, ethics, and outsourcing issues in
strategic and global ways.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EMP 525: Technology Assessment for
Emerging Technologies
This course will address the technology
assessment for emerging technology through
four basic components of technology
assessment: scope, technology, impact, and
policy. Emerging technology will cover
information technology, energy, and medical
technology.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

EMP 532: Big Data Systems for
Technological Management
The infrastructure requirements and challenges
of big data systems to support large-scale
technology management applications will
be discussed. Advanced topics in big data
infrastructure such as data center operations,
network and system security, data management
and integration will be covered. Cloud
computing platforms such as Iaas, Saas,
and Pass will also be included. Other
topics including advanced data mining and
visualization techniques as they relate to
customer relationship management (CRM),
supply chain management (SCM), and global
operations management applications will also
be discussed. Semesters Offered:
Fall, Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
73

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
EMP 572: Special Topics
This multidisciplinary course provides a
comprehensive overview of emerging topics in
society from both policy and technology point
of view. Topics include energy, smart city, big
data, disaster, bio-medical, and security. The
goal of the course is to assist students to gain
insights into different special topics to solve
challenging problems and discover new ones.
Offered Spring & Fall
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

ESE
Electrical Engineering
ESE 500: Introduction to Engineering
Education
This graduate course provides an in-depth
examination of engineering knowledge and
practices in the context of secondary science
content and instruction. The focus is on
engineering design principles and how they
may be applied to biology, chemistry, and
physics disciplinary domains. Key concepts
of effective engineering education will
be introduced: design-based approaches,
optimization, STEM integration, assessment,
and transfer of science principles to technology
solutions. Students will participate in
engineering education opportunities through
project design, research, and/or curriculum
opportunities at the secondary and postsecondary levels.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 501: System Specification and
Modeling
A comprehensive introduction to the field
of System-on-Chip design. Introduces basic
concepts of digital system modeling and
simulation methodologies. Various types
of hardware description language (HDL)
will be studied, including Verilog, VHDL,
and SystemC. Topics include top-down and
bottom-up design methodology, specification
language syntax and semantics, RTL,
behavioral and system-level modeling, and IP
core development. Included are three projects
on hardware modeling and simulation.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 502: Linear Systems
Development of transfer matrices and statespace equations from the concepts of linearity,
time-invariance, causality, and lumpedness.
Op-amp circuit implementations. Solutions
and equivalent state equations. Companion
and modal forms. Stability and Lyapunov
equations. Controllability, observability, and
their applications in minimal realization,

Spring 2021
state feedback, and state estimators. Coprime
fraction of transfer functions and their designs
in pole-placement and model matching. Both
the continuous-time and discrete-time systems
will be studied.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 503: Stochastic Systems
Basic probability concepts and application.
Probabilistic bounds, characteristic functions,
and multivariate distributions. Central limit
theorem, normal random variables, stochastic
processes in communications, control, and
other signal processing systems. Stationarity,
ergodicity, correlation functions, spectral
densities, and transmission properties.
Optimum linear filtering, estimation, and
prediction.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 504: Performance Evaluation
of Communications and Computer
Systems
Advanced scheduling theory, queuing models
and algorithms for communication and
computer systems. Transient analysis and M/
G/1 queue models. Networks of queues, mean
value analysis and convolution algorithms.
Petri networks. Bursty and self-similar traffic.
Divisible load theory for scheduling and
parallel computer performance evaluation.
Prerequisite: ESE 503 or permission of
instructor.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 505: Wireless Communications
This course covers first year graduate
level material in the area of wireless
communications: Wireless channels, overview
of digital communications and signal
processing for wireless comm., voice and
data applications, design basics for wireless
modems, analysis of system issues like
resource management and handoff, cellular
and wireless LAN systems.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
ESE 506: Wireless Network
This course will examine the area of wireless
networking and mobile computing, looking
at the unique network protocol challenges
and opportunities presented by wireless
communications and host or router mobility.
The course will give a brief overview of
fundamental concepts in mobile wireless
systems and mobile computing, it will then
cover system and standards issues including
second generation circuit switched and third
generation packet switched networks, wireless
LANs, mobile IP, ad-hoc networks, sensor

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

networks, as well as issues associated with
small handheld portable devices and new
applications that can exploit mobility and
location information. This is followed by
several topical studies around recent research
publications in mobile computing and wireless
networking field. This course will make the
system architecture and applications accessible
to the electrical engineer. Prerequisites: ESE
505 and ESE 546 or ESE 548, or permission of
instructor
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 507: Advanced Digital System
Design and Generation
This course focuses on languages, tools and
abstractions for design and implementation
of digital systems. Course material is divided
roughly into three categories: Limitations
and constraints on modern digital systems;
Hardware design abstractions, languages,
and tools (including the SystemVerilog
hardware description language); and new
architectures and paradigms for digital design.
Coursework will be primarily project and
assignment based; there will also be reading
and discussion of published papers in these
areas. Students should have experience with
hardware description languages (VHDL,
Verilog, or System Verilog) and software (C,
C++ or Java).
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 509: Modern Energy Technologies
This course cover a broad array of
technologies that are essential to the modern
energy industry, specifically focusing on the
most contemporary topics and ¿hot¿ areas
of research, development, and deployment.
Students will gain a quantitative understanding
of selected energy generation technologies,
energy storage technologies, and pollution
control technologies.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 510: Electronic Circuits
This is a course in the design and analysis of
analog circuits, both discrete and integrated.
The first part of the course presents basic
topics related to circuit analysis: laws,
theorems, circuit elements and transforms.
Fundamental semiconductor devices are
introduced next. A number of aspects of circuit
design beginning with basic device operation
through the design of large analog functional
blocks including amplifiers, oscillators and
filters are discussed.
Cannot be used to fulfill any ESE degree
requirements.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 511: Solid-State Electronics
74

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
A study of the electron and hole processes
in solids leading to the analysis and design
of solid-state electronic devices. Solutions to
the Schrodinger representation of quantum
effects, perturbation techniques. Simple band
structure, effective mass theorem. Derivation
and application of the Boltzmann transport
theory. Electrical and thermal conductivities
of metals and of semiconductors, and their
application to electronic devices. Properties of
semi conductors and the theories underlying
the characteristics of semiconductor devices.

Spring 2021
MOS field-effect transistor operation is
presented in an intuitive fashion, and no
advanced background in solid-state theory
is required. Analytical models of increasing
complexity and their SPICE Implementations
are discussed. The second part of the course
allows students to focus on their field of
preference: Device physics; digital circuits;
Analog circuits. The course includes a project
in one of these subtopics.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

ESE 515: Quantum Electronics I
Physics of microwave and optical lasers.
ESE 512: Introduction to Quantum
Topics include introduction to laser
Systems Engineering
concepts; quantum theory; classical radiation
A study of fundamental properties
theory; resonance phenomena in two-level
of homojunction and heterojunction
systems; Block equations-Kramers-Kronig
semiconductor devices. Derivation of the
relation, density matrix; rate equation and
characteristic equation for p-n junction diodes, amplification; CO2 lasers; discharge lasers;
for the bipolar junction transistor (BJT) and for semiconductor lasers.
the heterojunction bipolar transistor (HBT);
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
the device parameters for low- and highfrequency operation, the effects on the device
ESE 516: Integrated Electronic Devices
characteristics of fabrication methods and of
and Circuits I
structural arrangements. The development of
Theory and applications: elements of
the large-signal and small-signal equivalent
semiconductor electronics, methods of
circuits for the p-n diode and the BJT and
fabrication, bipolar junction transistors, FET,
HPT devices, with emphasis on models used
MOS transistors, diodes, capacitors, and
in prevalent computer-aided analysis (e.g.,
resistors. Design techniques for linear digital
SPICE). Consideration of the devices in
integrated electronic components and circuits.
integrated-circuit applications.
Discussion of computer-aided design, MSI,
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
and LSI.
etc.)
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

ESE 513: Introduction to Photovoltaics
Introduction to the basic concepts of
photovoltaic solar energy conversion,
including: 1. The solar resource in the
context of global energy demand; 2. The
operating principles and theoretical limits of
photovoltaic devices; 3. Device fabrication,
architecture, and primary challenges and
practical limitations for the major technologies
and materials used for photovoltaic devices.
Students will gain knowledge of the device
physics of solar cells, the operating principles
of the major commercial photovoltaic
technologies, the current challenges and
primary areas of research within the field of
photovoltaics, and a basic understanding of
the role of photovoltaics in the context of the
global energy system.

ESE 517: Integrated Electronic Devices
and Circuits II
Theory and applications: elements of
semiconductor electronics, methods of
fabrication, bipolar junction transistors, FET,
MOS transistors, diodes, capacitors, and
resistors. Design techniques for linear digital
integrated electronic components and circuits.
Discussion of computer-aided design, MSI,
and LSI.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

ESE 518: Advanced design of low
noise and low power analog circuits
Students will learn state-of-the-art circuit
techniques for low-noise and low-power
amplification and processing of signals
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
from sensors. Examples of circuits are lownoise amplifiers, filters, peak directors
ESE 514: MOSTransistor Modeling
and discriminators. Applications range
An overview of the metal-oxide semiconductor from medical, to security, safety, industrial
(MOS) transistor and its models for circuit
measurements and physics research. As a
analysis. The course is modular in structure.
course project, students will develop part of
In a common first part, CMOS fabrication,
a front-end circuit from transistor level to
device structure and operation are introduced. physical layout using industry-standard CAD
Starting from basic concepts of electrostatics,
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

tools, and will participate in the experimental
characterization of those similar circuits. At
the end of the course the student will own a
solid background and the basic instruments to
design low-noise and low-power amplifiers
and processing circuits.
Offered in Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
ESE 519: Semiconductor Lasers and
Photodetectors
The course provides an introduction to
performance, testing and fabrication
techniques for semiconductor lasers
and photodetectors. The topics include
fundamentals of laser and detector operation,
devices band diagram, device characteristics,
and testing techniques for analog and digital
edge emitting and surface emitting lasers,
avalanche and PIN photodetectors. Special
attention is given to the design and working
characteristics of transmitters and pumping
lasers for telecommunication networks.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 520: Applied Electromagnetics
Wave phenomena and their importance in
electromagnetic engineering. Harmonic waves.
Phase and group velocities. Dispersive and
nondispersive propagation. Transmission
lines. Maxwell Equations. Uniform plane
waves, waveguides, resonators. Scattering
matrix theory. Introduction to antenna theory.
Electrostatics and magnetostatics as special
cases of Maxwell equations.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ESE 522: Fiber Optic Systems
This course covers the essential components
of a modern optical fiber communication
system: (I) wave propagation in optical fiber
waveguides, (II) transmitter design, (III)
receiver design, (IV) single wavelength fiberoptic networks, and (V) wavelength division
multiplexing networks.
Prerequisite: ESE 319
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 523: Quantum Computing and
Applications
This course is an introduction to and survey
of the Quantum Computing, an emerging
interdisciplinary field of science which has the
potential to revolutionize computation over
the next ten years, to transform chemistry,
medicine, engineering and communications,
as well as to change our understanding
of physical world. The course will build
intuitive approach to quantum computation
and algorithms, but also will advance relevant
75

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
vocabulary and skills for faculties and
graduate students in engineering, computing,
applied mathematics, chemistry, physics, and
related sciences. The key questions of the
quantum computing will be introduced. How
to describe quantum systems and quantum
operations? What is a quantum computer
and what are the limits of quantum power?
What is the difference between classical and
quantum computation? Quantum teleportation?
Quantum entanglement and superposition?
How to mitigate errors and decoherence
and transmit information through noisy
channels? What are business applications
and engineering challenges of the quantum
computers? What are the gains in running
quantum vs. classical algorithms? What are
the physical principles of the current quantum
computers hardware and what are technology
requirements for realistic quantum computers?
4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 524: Microwave Acoustics
Continuum acoustic field equations. Wave
equation, boundary conditions, and Pointing
vector. Waves in isotropic elastic media:
plane-wave modes, reflection and refraction
phenomena, bulk-acoustic-wave (BAW)
waveguides, surface acoustic waves (SAW).
Plane and guided waves in piezoelectric media.
BAW transduction and applications: delay-line
and resonator structures, the Mason equivalent
circuit, monolithic crystal filters, IM CON
dispersive delay lines, acoustic microscopes,
SAW transduction and applications: the
interdigital transducer, band-pass filters,
dispersive filters, convolvers, tapped delay
lines, resonators.
Prerequisite: ESE 319
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 525: Moden Sensors
Sensors are devices that convert physical
values into electrical signals. This course will
provide practical information on diversified
subjects related to the operation principles,
design and use of various sensors. Established
and novel sensor technologies as well as
problems of interfacing various sensors with
electronics are discussed.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 526: Silicon Technology for VLSI
This course introduces the basic technologies
employed to fabricate advanced integrated
circuits. These include epitaxy, diffusion,
oxidation, chemical vapor deposition, ion
implantation lithography and etching. The
significance of the variation of these steps is
discussed with respect to its effect on device
performance. The electrical and geometric
design rules are examined together with the

Spring 2021
integration of these fabrication techniques to
reveal the relationship between circuit design
and the fabrication process.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 528: Communication Systems
This course provides a general overview
of communication theory and addresses
fundamental concepts in this field. After a
review of signals and systems representations,
various continuous and digital modulation
schemes are analyzed. Spread spectrum
systems and their application to multiuser
communications are also addressed. Advanced
communication systems are described and
general concepts of wide and local area
networks are introduced.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 530: Computer-Aided Design
The course presents techniques for analyzing
linear and nonlinear dynamic electronic
circuits using the computer. Some of the
topics covered include network graph theory,
generalized nodal and hybrid analysis,
companion modeling. Newton's method in ndimensions and numerical integration.
Prerequisite: B.S. in Electrical Engineering
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ESE 531: Detection and Estimation
Theory
Hypothesis testing and parameter estimation.
Series representation of random processes.
Detection and estimation of known signals in
white and nonwhite Gaussian noise. Detection
of signals with unknown parameters.
Prerequisite: ESE 503 or permission of
instructor
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ESE 532: Theory of Digital
Communication
Optimum receivers, efficient signaling,
comparison classes of signaling schemes.
Channel capacity theorem, bounds on
optimum system performance, encoding
for error reduction, and the fading channel.
Source coding and some coding algorithms.
Prerequisite: ESE 503

Duality theory and optimality conditions.
Unconstrained minimization methods. Interiorpoint methods. Nondifferentiable problems.
Decomposition methods. Applications in
engineering fields including statistical signal
processing, communications, networking,
energy systems, circuit design, and machine
learning.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 534: Cyber Physical Systems
As computers and communication bandwidth
become ever-faster and ever-cheaper,
computing and communication capabilities
will be embedded in all types of objects
and structures in the physical environment.
Applications with enormous societal impact
and economic benefit will be created by
harnessing these capabilities in time and
across space. We refer to systems that
bridge the cyber-world of computing and
communications with the physical world as
cyber physical systems (CPS). This course
covers important areas from the research
literature on SPS. Three application domains
are emphasized: medical devices for health
care, smart transportation systems, and
smart buildings. Several key cross-cutting
principles, independent of the application
domain, are also covered, including formal
modeling, embedded systems, real-time
systems, feedback control and sensor
networks. Prerequisite: Background in
embedded systems and computer networking is
necessary.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 536: Switching and Routing in
Parallel and Distributed Systems
This course covers various switching and
routing issues in parallel and distributed
systems. Topics include message switching
techniques, design of interconnection
networks, permutation, multicast and all-toall routing in various networking nonblocking,
and rearrangable capability analysis and
performance modeling.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

ESE 537: Mobile Sensing Systems &
Applications
This is a graduate course focusing on recent
advances and developments in mobile sensing
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
systems and their applications, especially
those leveraging modern mobile devices
ESE 533: Convex Optimization and
and embedded sensors. Topics include:
Engineering Applications
conventional mote-class sensor networks,
Introduction to convex optimization and its
participatory sensing leveraging mobile
applications. Convex sets, functions, and
devices, intelligent hardware and Internet-ofbasics of convex analysis. Linear and quadratic Things, location sensing, future information
programs, second-order cone and semidefinite centric networking, and applications in smart
programming, geometric programming.
homes, buildings, transportation, environment

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

76

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
and health/fitness. Student need to read latest
literature and write reviews, work on research
problems and develop solutions, present their
work and write formal reports. The practice of
the basic research skills are major components.
This course intends to be self-sufficient and
prior experiences in programming, mobile
devices and embedded systems is a plus.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 538: Nanoelectronics
The major goals and objectives are to
provide graduate students with knowledge
and understanding of physical background
and applications of nanoelectronics. The
course will cover electrical and optical
properties of materials and nanostructures,
fabrication of nanostructures, nanoelectronic
devices including resonant-tunneling
devices, transistors, and single-electron
transfer devices, as well as applications of
nanotechnologies in molecular biology and
medicine.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 540: Reliability Theory
Theory of reliability engineering.
Mathematical and statistical means of
evaluating the reliability of systems of
components. Analytical models for systems
analysis, lifetime distributions, repairable
systems, warranties, preventive maintenance,
and inspection. Software reliability and fault
tolerant computer systems. Prerequisite: ESE
503 or permission of instructor
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ESE 541: Digital System Design
The course provides an introduction to digital
and computer systems. The course follows
a top-down approach to presenting design
of computer systems, from the architecturallevel to the gate-level. VHDL language is
used to illustrate the discussed issues. Topics
include design hierarchy and top-down
design, introduction to hardware description
languages, computer-aided design and digital
synthesis, basic building blocks like adders,
comparators, multipliers, latches, flip-flops,
registers etc, static and dynamic random
access memory, data and control buses,
fundamental techniques for combinational
circuit analysis and design, sequential circuit
design procedures, and programmable logic
devices. Testing of digital designs is addressed
throughout the course. A mini project will
complement the course.
Cannot be used to fulfill any ESE degree
requirements.

Spring 2021
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ESE 542: Product Design Concept
Development and Optimization
This graduate course will concentrate on the
design concept development of the product
development cycle, from the creative phase of
solution development to preliminary concept
evaluation and selection. The course will then
cover methods for mathematical modeling,
computer simulation and optimization. The
concept development component of the course
will also cover intellectual property and patent
issues. The course will not concentrate on
the development of any particular class of
products, but the focus will be mainly on
mechanical and electromechanical devices and
systems. As part of the course, each participant
will select an appropriate project to practice
the application of the material covered in the
course and prepare a final report.
Prerequisites: Undergraduate electrical
or mechanical engineering and/or science
training.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 543: Mobile Cloud Computing
Introduction to the basic concepts of mobile
cloud computing, including 1. The mobile
computing technology used in modern smart
phones; 2. The cloud computing technologies
used in existing data centers; 3. The synergy
of mobile and cloud computing and its
applications; and 4. Programming on smart
phone utilizing data center services. Students
will gain knowledge of the fundamental
principles of mobile cloud computing, the
major technologies that support mobile cloud
computing, the current challenges and primary
areas of research within the field of mobile
cloud computing, and a basic understanding
of the role of mobile cloud computing in the
context of the everyday living.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 544: Network Security
Engineering
An introduction to computer network
and telecommunication network security
engineering. Special emphasis on building
security into hardware and hardware working
with software. Topics include encryption,
public key cryptography, authentication,
intrusion detection, digital rights management,
firewalls, trusted computing, encrypted
computing, intruders and virus. Some projects.
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 545: Computer Architecture

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

The course covers uniprocessor and pipelined
vector processors. Topics include: hierarchical
organization of a computer system; processor
design; control design; memory organization
and virtual memory; I/O systems; balancing
subsystem bandwidths; RISC processors;
principles of designing pipelined processors;
vector processing on pipelines; examples of
pipelined processors. The course involves a
system design project using VHDL.
Prerequisite: ESE 218 or equivalent
Spring, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ESE 546: Networking Algorithms and
Analysis
An introduction to algorithms and analysis for
computer and telecommunication networks.
Continuous time and discrete time single
queue analysis. Algorithms from public key
cryptography, routing, protocol verification,
multiple access, error codes, data compression,
search.
Prerequisite: ESE 503 or permission of
instructor.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 547: Digital Signal Processing
A basic graduate course in Digital Signal
Processing. Sampling and reconstruction
of Signals. Review of Z-Transform theory.
Signal flow-graphs. Design of FIR and IIR
filters. Discrete and fast Fourier transforms.
Introduction to adaptive signal processing.
Implementation considerations.
Prerequisite: Senior level course in signals
and systems
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 548: Computer Networks
Basic theory and technology of computer
communications. Introduction to performance
evaluation, error codes and routing algorithms.
Other topics include Ethernet, wireless
networks including LTE and 5G, fiber optic
networking, software defined networking,
networking on chips, space networks, data
centers, grids and clouds, and network
security. 3 credits , grading ABCF.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 549: Advanced VLSI System
Testing
This course is designed to acquaint students
with fault diagnosis of logic circuits. Both
combinatorial and sequential circuits are
considered. Concepts of faults and fault
models are presented. Emphasis is given to test
generation, test selection, fault detection, fault
location, fault location within a module and
fault correction.
77

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Prerequisite: BS in Electrical Engineering
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ESE 550: Network Management and
Planning
This course provides an introduction to
telecommunications and computer network
management and planning. Network
management is concerned with the operation
of networks while network planning is
concerned with the proper evolution of
network installations over time. Network
management topics include meeting service
requirements, management operations,
management interoperability, and specific
architectures such as Telecommunications
Management Network (TMN), and Simple
Network Management Protocol (SNMP).
Network planning topics include planning
problem modeling, topological planning
design, heuristic and formal solution
techniques.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 552: Interconnection Networks
Formation and analysis of interconnect
processing elements in parallel computing
organization. Topics include: SIMD/MIMD
computers, multiprocessors, multicomputers,
density, symmetry, representations, and
routing algorithms. Topologies being discussed
include: Benes, Omega, Banyan, mesh,
hypercube, cube-connected cycles, generalized
chordal rings, chordal rings, DeBruijn,
Moebius graphs, Cayley graphs, and Borel
Cayley graphs.
Prerequisite: ESE 545 or equivalent
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 553: A/D and D/A Integrated Data
Converters
This is an advanced course on analog
integrated circuit design aspects for data
converters. Topics include: continuous and
discrete-time signals and systems; sampling
theorem; ideal ND and D/A converters;
specifications and testing of data converters;
basic building blocks in data converters:
current sources and mirrors, differential
gain stages, voltage references, S/H circuits,
comparators: Nyquist D/A and ND converters:
principles of data conversion and circuit design
techniques; oversampling data converters: lowpass and band-pass delta-sigma modulators,
decimation and interpolation for delta-sigma
data converters. The attending students must
be acquainted with principles of transistor
operation, function of simple analysis.
Familiarity with SPICE is required.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring 2021
ESE 554: Computational Models for
Computer Engineers
This course covers mathematical techniques
and models used in the solution of computer
engineering problems. The course heavily
emphasizes computer engineering application.
Topics covered include set theory, relations,
functions, graph theory and graph algorithms,
and algebraic structures.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 555: Advanced VLSI Systems
Design
Techniques of VLSI circuit design in the MOS
technology are presented. Topics include
MOS transistor theory, CMOS processing
technology, MOS digital circuit analysis and
design, and various CMOS circuit design
techniques. Digital systems are designed and
simulated throughout the course using an
assortment of VLSI design tools.
Prerequisite: B.S. in Electrical Engineering or
Computer Science
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ESE 556: VLSI Physical and Logic
Design Automation
Areas to be covered are Physical Design
Automation and Logic Design Automation.
Upon completion of this course, students will
be able to develop state-of-the art CAD tools
and algorithms for VLSI logic and physical
design. Tools will address design tasks such as
floor planning, module placement and signal
routing. Also, automated optimization of
combinational and sequential circuits will be
contemplated.
Prerequisite: B.S. in Computer Engineering/
Science or Electrical Engineering
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

ESE 558: Digital Image Processing I
Covers digital image fundamentals,
mathematical preliminaries of two-dimensional
systems, image transforms, human perception,
color basics, sampling and quantization,
compression techniques, image enhancement,
image restoration, image reconstruction from
projections, and binary image processing.
Prerequisite: B.S. in Engineering or Physical
or Mathematical Sciences
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 563: Fundamentals of Robotics I
This course covers homogenous
transformations of coordinates; kinematic
and dynamic equations of robots with their
associated solutions; control and programming
of robots.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 565: Parallel Processing
Architectures
This course provides a comprehensive
introduction to parallel processing.
Topics include types of parallelism,
classification of parallel computers, functional
organizations, interconnection networks,
memory organizations, control methods,
parallel programming, parallel algorithms,
performance enhancement techniques and
design examples for SIMD array processors,
loosely coupled multiprocessors, and tightly
coupled multiprocessors. A brief overview of
dataflow and reduction machines will also be
given.
Prerequisite: ESE 545 or equivalent
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

ESE 566: Hardware-Software CoDesign of Embedded Systems
ESE 557: Digital Signal Processing II:
This course will present state-of-the-art
Advanced Topics
concepts and techniques for design of
A number of different topics in digital signal
embedded systems consisting of hardware
processing will be covered, depending on
and software components. Discussed topics
class and current research interest. Areas to
include system specification, architectures for
be covered include the following: parametric
embedded systems, performance modeling and
signal modeling, spectral estimation, multirate evaluation, system synthesis and validation.
processing, advanced FFT and convolution
The course is complemented by three
algorithms, adaptive signal processing,
mini-projects focused on designing and
multidimensional signal processing, advanced implementing various co-design methods.
filter design, dedicated signal processing chips, Prerequisite: ESE 545, ESE 554 and ESE 333
and signal processing for inverse problems.
Fall
Students will be expected to read and present
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
current research literature.
ESE 568: Computer and Robot Vision
Prerequisite: ESE 547 or permission of
instructor
Principles and applications of computer
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
and robot vision are covered. Primary
etc.)
emphasis is on techniques and algorithms
for 3D machine vision. The topics include

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

78

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
image sensing of 3D scenes, a review of 2D
techniques, image segmentation, stereo vision,
optical flow, time-varying image analysis,
shape from shading, texture, depth from
defocus, matching, object recognition, shape
representation, interpretation of line drawings,
and representation and analysis of 3D range
data. The course includes programming
projects on industrial applications of robot
vision.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 569: Translational Bioinformatics
Advanced technologies have driven rapid
increases in the quantities of biomedical
data. Translational bioinformatics develops
the specified computational and analytic
methods to transform these large-scale datasets
into biomedical applicable information and
knowledge. It is one of major applications
of machine learning and data mining. This
course introduces large-scale biomedical
data resources and management, data
processing and modeling, data mining and
machine learning approaches in translational
bioinformatics, and provides the handson projects for students to practice these
approaches for real-world biomedical data.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 575: Advanced VLSI Signal
Processing Architecture
This course is concerned with advanced
aspects of VLSI architecture in digital signal
processing and wireless communications. The
first phase of the course covers the derivation
of both data transformation and control
sequencing from a behavioral description
of an algorithm. The next phase reviews the
general purpose and dedicated processor for
signal processing algorithms. This course
focuses on low-complexity high-performance
algorithm development and evaluation, system
architecture modeling, power-performance
tradeoff analysis. The emphasis is on the
development of application-specific VLSI
architectures for current and future generation
of wireless digital communication systems. An
experimental/research project is required.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 576: Power System Dynamics
The course provides the background for
understanding power system dynamics and
numerical simulation techniques. Topics
include the numerical integration for largescale power networks, numerical oscillation
and its solution, power system component
modeling, frequency-dependent transmission
network, nonlinear elements, network
equivalents, power network stability, and
microgrid stability & control. The area of

Spring 2021
real-time simulation for cyber-physical power
infrastructures will also be discussed.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ESE 579: Advances Topics in
Translational Bioinformatics
This course introduces the current applications
of machine learning and data mining
techniques in biomedical data science,
discusses the latest translational research
areas and progresses, and provides the handson team projects for graduate students to
explore, design and practice their ¿datadriven¿ solutions for the cutting-edge research
topics in biomedical data science.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 581: Microprocessor-Based
Systems Engineering II
This course is a study of methodologies and
techniques for the engineering design of
microprocessor-based systems. Emphasis
is placed on the design of reliable industrial
quality systems. Diagnostic features are
included in these designs. Steps in the design
cycle are considered. Specifically, requirement
definitions, systematic design implementation,
testing, debugging, documentation, and
maintenance are covered. Laboratory
demonstrations of design techniques are
included in this course. The students also
obtain laboratory experience in the use of
microprocessors, the development of systems,
circuit emulation, and the use of signature and
logic analyzers.
Spring, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ESE 585: Nanoscale Integrated Circuit
Design
This course describes high performance
and low power integrated circuit (IC)
design issues for advanced nanoscale
technologies. After a brief review of VLSI
design methodologies and current IC
trends, fundamental challenges related to
the conventional CMOS technologies are
described. The shift from logic-centric to
interconnect-centric design is emphasized.
Primary aspects of an interconnect-centric
design flow are described in four phases:
(1) general characteristics of on-chip
interconnects, (2) on-chip interconnects for
data signals, (3) on-chip power generation and
distribution, and (4) on-chip clock generation
and distribution. Existing design challenges
faced by IC industry are investigated for
each phase. Tradeoffs among various design
criteria such as speed-power-noise-area are
highlighted. In the last phase of the course,
several post-CMOS devices, emerging circuit

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

styles, and architectures are briefly discussed.
At the end of the course, the students will
have a thorough understanding of the primary
circuit and physical level design challenges
with application to industrial IC design.
Prerequisites: ESE555 or ESE330 and ESE
355
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ESE 586: Micro Grids
This course will discuss techniques useful for
the grid modernization from a unique angle
of microgrid design, analysis and operation.
It will cover smart inverters, microgrid
architectures, distributed energy resources
modeling, microgrid hierarchical control,
microgrid stability, fault management, resilient
microgrids through programmable network,
reliable networked microgrids, and cyber
security.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ESE 587: Hardware Architectures for
Deep Learning
This course focuses on the design and
implementation of specialized digital
hardware systems for executing deep learning
algorithms. The course is divided into
three sections. First, students will study
field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs)
and related tools. Second, the course will
present an overview of modern deep learning
algorithms and applications (e.g., visual object
recognition, or speech recognition). Third,
students will apply this knowledge to complete
a significant design project implementing and
optimizing a deep learning algorithm on an
FPGA.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESE 588: Pattern Recognition
Basic concepts of pattern recognition
techniques are introduced, including
statistical pattern recognition, syntactic
pattern recognition, and graph matching.
Topics on Bayes decision theory, parametric
and nonparametric techniques, clustering
techniques, formal languages, parsing
algorithms, and graph-matching algorithms are
covered.
Prerequisite: Stochastic processes and data
structures
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ESE 589: Learning Systems for
Engineering Applications
The course presents the main methods
used in automated (machine) learning
79

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
for engineering applications. The course
discusses representation models for learning,
extraction of frequent patterns, classification,
clustering and application of these techniques
for diverse engineering applications, such
as Intranet-of-Things, electronic design
automation, and healthcare. The covered topics
include an overview of learning systems,
learning representations i.e. ontologies,
regression models, stochastic models and
symbolic models, data preparing techniques,
different frequent pattern extraction methods,
supervised and unsupervised classification,
and basic and advanced clustering algorithms.
The course is organized as three modules,
each module being centered on a specific
theme. Students will learn the characteristics
of the enumerated topics, and devise and
implement software programs for discussed
techniques as part of their project work for the
course. Student projects will be assessed using
standard benchmarks.

Spring 2021
Fall and Spring, 1-12 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ESE 610: Seminar in Solid-State
Electronics
Current research in solid-state devices and
circuits and computer-aided network design.
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)

enrolled in ESE-698 are expected to perform
various teaching duties required by the course
instructor, such as attending lectures, providing
office hours, holding review/recitation
sessions, assisting in lab sections and grading,
etc.
Fall, Spring, Summer, 1-3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

ESE 670: Topics in Electrical Sciences
Varying topics selected from current research
topics. This course is designed to give the
necessary flexibility to students and faculty
to introduce new material into the curriculum
before it has attracted sufficient interest to
be made part of the regular course material.
Topics include biomedical engineering,
circuit theory, controls, electronics circuits,
digital systems and electronics, switching
theory and sequential machines, digital
signal processing, digital communications,
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
computer architecture, networks, systems
May be repeated for credit.
theory, solid-state electronics, integrated
electronics, quantum electronics and lasers,
ESE 590: Practical ML
communication theory, wave propagation,
The course provides a broad introduction to the integrated optics, optical communications and
state-of-the-art of machine learning methods
information processing, instrumentation, and
through lectures and labs, where the lectured
VLSI computer design and processing.
summarize the theoretical foundations of the
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
methods. Students work in teams and utilize
A-, B+, etc.)
modern tools to develop a specific application
May be repeated for credit.
in areas like computer vision, biomedical
engineering and social sciences.
ESE 691: Seminar in Electrical

ESE 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Prerequisite: Advancement to candidacy (G5).
Major portion of research must take place on
SBU campus, at Cold Spring Harbor, or at the
Brookhaven National Lab.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

ESE 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
in MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.

ESE 591: Industrial Project in OEMS
Engineering
A student carries out a detailed design of an
industrial project in OEMS engineering. A
comprehensive technical report of the project
and an oral presentation are required.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Engineering
This course is designed to expose students
to the broadest possible range of the current
activities in electrical engineering. Speakers
from both on and off campus discuss topics of
current interest in electrical engineering.
Fall and Spring, 1 credit, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.
ESE 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

ESE 697: Ph.D. Practicum in Teaching
The course provides hands-on experience
in classroom teaching. Other activities
may include preparation and supervison of
laboratory experiments, exams, homework
assignments and projects. Final report that
summarizes the activities and provides a
description of the gained experience and a list
of recommendations is required. Prerequisite:
G5 status and Permission of Graduate Program All international students must received
clearance from an International Advisor.
Director
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
The maximum credits which can be accepted
ESE 698: Practicum in Teaching
ESE 800: FULL TIME SUMMER
towards the M.S. degree is 3 credits.
This course enables graduate students to
RESEARCH
Fall, Spring, Summer, 1-3 credits, S/U grading gain experience in teaching and interacting
May be repeated for credit.
May be repeated for credit.
with students enrolled in an electrical and
computer engineering course. Students
ESE 599: Research Master's students
ESE 597: Practicum in Engineering Internship
This course is for part-time and full-time
graduate students, relating to their current
professional activity. Participation is in private
corporations, public agencies or non-profit
institutions. Students will be required to have
a faculty advisor as well as a contact in the
outside organization to participate with them in
regular consultations on their project. Students
are required to submit a final written final
report to both.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

80

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

ESL
English as Second Language
ESL 593: Advanced Composition
Advanced training in writing for ESL students
who need to concentrate on paragraph
development. The first half of the semester
deals with paragraph construction, stressing
concepts of the main thesis and supporting
arguments. Some advanced grammar is
reviewed, but the assumption is that basic
structures and mechanics of writing have
already been mastered. The second half of
the semester stresses combining paragraphs
into short compositions. Both descriptive
and argumentative writing are practiced.
Diagnostic test during first week of classes
determines placement in the course. A through
C/Unsatisfactory grading only.

Spring 2021
This course will focus on several concepts
underlying the impact of materials on
the environment and various methods of
minimizing them, More specifically this
course will explore the concepts of air and
water pollution associated with product
manufacturing, various concepts of hazardous
materials impact on human health, several
topics of sustainable developments and
selected methods of contaminated water and
air treatment. Additionally this course will
be addressing the issues of how to minimize
the environmental pollution by product
substitution and by decreasing the energy input
into materials production. It will also give an
overview of the concepts of green chemistry,
green engineering and industrial ecology.

Students will examine writing as it appears in
published and draft format, taking into account
different audience needs. Processes we will
cover include: planning, organizing, writing,
review, editing and rewriting. Grammar issues,
particularly those that challenge non-native
speakers, will also be addressed. We will be
working with Professor Gerald Graff's idea
of "They Say/I Say," a cornerstone strategy
of academic conversation, in which newer
colleagues in a field (i.e., undergraduate and
graduate students) learn by apprenticeship how
to engage their peers in the discussion of ideas
through written format. Offered
Spring, 0-3 credits, S/U grading

ESM 519: Electrochemistry and
Electrochemical Materials Science
This course will survey electrochemistry and
electrochemical materials science. Topics
ESM 511: Thermodynamics of Solids
will include fundamental measurements
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Current knowledge regarding the
in electrochemistry, galvanostatic and
thermodynamic properties of condensed
potentiostatic methods, the electrochemical
phases is discussed. The thermodynamic
double layer, corrosion and passivation.
treatment of ideal, regular, and real solutions is Relevant applications such as fuel cells,
reviewed. Estimation of reaction-free energies batteries, and supercapacitors will be
Materials Science
and equilibria in condensed phase reactions
discussed.
such
as
diffusion,
exication,
and
phase
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESM 501: Teaching and Mentoring
transformations; thermodynamic analysis of
Techniques
phase equilibrium diagrams.
ESM 521: Kinetics of Materials
Discussion of various phases of teaching,
Fall,
3
credits,
Letter
graded
(A,
A-,
B+,
etc.)
This Kinetics of Materials course will
including preparation, classroom technique,
discuss important kinetic phenomena in
and student evaluation. Also exploration
ESM 512: Structure of Materials
materials science and engineering. The
of skills and understanding necessary for
The structure of solids can be studied using
studies of kinetics explore how materials
mentoring of undergraduates and others
X-ray,
neutron,
and
electron
diffraction
evolve and change in structure, morphology
involved in research.
techniques. Topics covered are coherent
and composition. The understanding
Fall, 1 credit, S/U grading
and incoherent scattering of radiation,
of kinetics in materials leads to a broad
structure
of
crystalline
and
amorphous
solids,
impact in all scientific and engineering
ESM 502: Scanning Electron
stereographic
projection
and
crystal
orientation
fields concerning materials design and
Microscopy Skills
determination, the concept of reciprocal vector processing. This course will cover topics
Practical introduction to the operation of
space. Laboratory work in X-ray diffraction is ranging from core knowledges such as
scanning electron microscopes, including
also included.
various diffusion phenomena and motions
energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometers.
of defects and interfaces, to more complex
Fall,
3
credits,
Letter
graded
(A,
A-,
B+,
etc.)
Required of all students who use the SEM in
subjects such as phase transformations and
their research.
development of microstructure. It emphasizes
ESM 513: Strength of Materials
Spring, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
the comprehension of fundamentals, leading to
A unified approach for all solid materials
a better understanding of processing-structurewill
be
used
with
regard
to
the
correlation
ESM 503: Electron Diffraction
between microstructure and their macroscopic property relationships.
A quantitative discussion of electron
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
mechanical properties. The course deals with
diffraction as a means of microvarious testing techniques for delineating
characterization of materials and as a basis
mechanical properties of materials, considering ESM 522: Imperfections in Crystals
for understanding image contrast in the
elasticity, inelasticity, plasticity, dislocation
The characteristics of point defects in metals,
transmission electron microscope. Topics
theory, cohesive strength, fracture, and surface semiconductors, and ionic solids are described,
covered include atomic, kinematical, and
wear. Attention is given to strengthening
and the thermodynamics of point defects is
dynamical scattering; indexing diffraction
mechanisms for solids, metals, ceramics, and
developed. Dislocation theory is introduced
patterns; and convergent-beam diffraction.
polymers.
and the structures of internal boundaries are
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) described. Finally, interactions between lattice
etc.)
imperfections are discussed, with emphasis on
plasticity and fracture.
ESM 514: Technical Writing for
ESM 508: Impact of Materials on
Materials Scientist
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
Environment
etc.)
Offered in Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)

ESM

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

81

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
ESM 523: Solid-State Electronics
A study of the electronic processes in
solids leading to the analysis and design of
materials and devices. Crystal structures,
binding, electrical and thermal conductivities,
diffusion, galvomagnetic, thermomagnetic,
and thermoelectric effects. Hall effect and
magnetoresistance. Conductivity in thin films.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESM 531: Phase Transformations
Kinetics and Transformations II changed
to Phase Transformations. A review of the
processes by which structures are changed
in the solid state. Classical nucleation theory
including homogeneous and heterogeneous
mechanisms. Diffusion and diffusionless
growth mechanisms. Transformation kinetics.

Spring 2021
scaffolds in bioengineering. This course may
be counted as either CSE 370 or ESM 537.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ESM 542: Modern Electron Microscopy
Principles and practice for transmission and
scanning transmission electron microscopes.
Instrument design. Specimen preparation.
Instrument operation. Electron diffraction
and imaging theory. Microanalysis using Xray and electron spectra. Typical electron
microscope investigations are outlined and
used as examples.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

ESM 550: Introduction to Homeland
Security
The course is a combination of lectures
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
and laboratory experience to introduce
etc.)
students to critical issues and assess needs
for homeland security. The course includes
ESM 532: Materials Processing
invited lectures by experts on special topics
A study of manufacturing processes used
such as fundamentals of nuclear, chemical,
in the semiconductor industries. Topics
and biological weapons and the associated
include single crystal growth, compound
threat to the transportation of goods and the
formation, zone refining, epitaxial growth,
doping techniques, thin film techniques, thick public. The students will learn about cyber
security, devices to safeguard materials from
film techniques, passivations, isolations, lead
bonding techniques, cleaning and etching, and terrorist threats, safety of nuclear power plants
failure analysis; discrete devices and integrated and water supply, forensics and emergency
circuit devices; various modern concepts in IC preparedness. The students will submit a term
paper on a selected topic in lieu of the final
processing.
exam.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Prerequisite: undergraduate level biology,
chemistry and physics.
ESM 533: Polymeric Materials
Fall, Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B
Introduction to the physical properties of
+, etc.)
polymeric materials. Conformations, phase
diagrams, and flow properties of polymers
and polymer solutions. Rubber elasticity of
polymer networks and melts. Flory-Huggins
lattice model for concentrated solutions.
Applications to diffusion, segregation, and
spinodal decomposition in polymer blends.
Experimental methods.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESM 534: Advanced Laboratory
Students perform a series of advanced
materials experiments which involve some
independent research. The results are then
written in a report suitable for publication in a
journal or proceeding.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESM 537: Cellular Interactions
This course is intended to introduce cellular
and biological concepts and principles for
graduate students in chemical engineers
related to their research projects that involve
cellular interactions with materials as possible

ESM 553: Nuclear Safeguards and
Security
The course is intended to familiarize students
with the fundamentals of nuclear physics,
radiation, mining, weapons and fuel cycle,
other than producing electricity, as it pertains
to nuclear power plants. Topics include
nuclear detection, devices to safeguard nuclear
materials from terrorist threats, needed
physical protection for safe handling and its
relevance to Homeland Security. The course
combines lectures with hands-on experience at
the newly installed nuclear detection facility
located at the nearby United States Department
of Energy's Brookhaven National Laboratory.
Prerequisite: undergraduate equivalent
physics and chemistry.
Fall, Spring, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B
+, etc.)
ESM 554: Chemical & Biological
Weapons: Safeguards and Security

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

This course deals with the fundamentals of
chemistry and biochemistry related to chemical
weapons (CW) and biological weapons (BW)
that could be used by terrorists. Topics include
CW and BW history, production, control,
detection, identification, and emergency
response measures to deal with intended or
unintended release and escape, and security
measures to protect and control stockpiles.
Prerequisite: Undergraduate equivalent
chemistry, biochemistry, and microbiology.
Fall, Spring, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B
+, etc.)
ESM 555: Synchrotron Techniques in
Materials Science
A short course in a selected synchrotron
analytical technique as applied to problems in
Materials Science. May include demonstration
and hands-on experience at the national
synchrotron light source at Brookhaven
National Laboratory, and synchrotron safety
training.
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESM 560: Risk Assessment,
Regulation, and Homeland Security
The course focus is on risk assessment
associated with nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons as it relates to Homeland
Security. Topics include air dispersion,
uncertainty analysis, exposure measurements,
epidemiology, toxicology, regulatory issues,
risk management, risk communication, risk
perception, and risk preparedness. The course
will also cover laws and regulation, and
disaster preparedness, various acts passed by
the U.S. Congress to regulate water, air, and
controlled substances.
Prerequisite: undergraduate or equivalent
physics, math and chemistry.
Fall, Spring, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B
+, etc.)
ESM 561: Crystal Growth Technology
The main goal of this course is to introduce
graduate students to the fundamentals and
physical principles that govern the process of
crystal growth and show them how to apply
those principles to design and engineer growth
systems for different crystalline materials.
While microscopic theory of nucleation and
growth kinetics will be an essential part of this
course, its core will mainly focus on applying
transport phenomena and thermodynamics of
chemical reactions to the design of processing
reactors. As part of the academic requirements
associated with this course, students will form
teams and work on the virtual design of crystal
growth reactors using software packages for
transport phenomena modeling.
82

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESM 562: Traditional Fossil Fuels
The course will focus on the original and
history of traditional fossil fuels, coal,
petroleum and natural gas. Discuss mining
methods and the role of fossil fuels play in the
post-industrial revolution era. A comparison
of the three fossil fuels with respect to their
energy content, CO2 output and associated
environmental impact tied to global warming.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESM 566: Fuel Combustion
The course will focus on combustion process
for heat and power generation. Describe both
fundamentals and actual systems involving
fossil feuls and upcoming CO2-neutral
biofuels. Emphasis on fuel combustion in
stationary equipment, emissions characteristics
of burning fuels and challenges in developing
the next-generation combustion equipment.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ESM 569: Biofuels
The course will focus on biofuels- a promising
option to replace fossil fuels. Topics to be
covered include crop-growth cycle and its
impact on land-use, biomass to various fuel
options, their integration into the exiting
energy delivery infrastructure and potential
benefit in CO2 reduction.

Spring 2021
ultrasonics for nondestructive evaluation is
considered.
Prerequisite: ESM 513
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ESM 608: Seminar in Catalysis
Introduction to homogeneous and
heterogeneous catalysis. Geometric factors
in catalysis. The kinetics of heterogeneous
catalysis. Electronic factors in catalysis:
metals, semiconductors, and surface species.
Preparation and properties of metal surfaces.
Porosity. Typical industrial processes, e.g.,
Fischer-Tropsch, ammonia synthesis, ammonia
oxidation, etc.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESM 614: Seminar in Diffusion in
Solids
Diffusion in solids is considered in detail,
including solution of the transport equations
for volume, grain boundary, and surface
diffusion. Kirkendall effect and other diffusion
phenomena, atomic mechanisms of diffusion,
correlation effects, etc. Next, the theory
of processes in which diffusion plays an
important role is considered, such as ionic
conduction, oxidation of metals, and the
sintering of solids.
Spring, 3 credits, S/U grading

ESM 694: Directed Studies in Materials
Science
This course is designed for research on special
topics in Materials Science and is directed by
ESM 575: The Material World
a faculty member. Designed for students who
want to research areas that are not typically
The evolution of the Material World starting
covered by regular coursework. Registration
from the Big Bang, the creation of stars and
galaxies, the nucleosynthesis of the elements in requires the faculty member's and departmental
approval. Cannot be repeated for credit with
supernova explosions, formation of the Earth
the same faculty member.
and Solar System, human adaptation of Earth
resources to create the Modern World will be
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
discussed. In this process we will discover the May be repeated for credit.
fundamental laws governing material behavior
and explore the cosmic significance of our
ESM 695: Graduate Internship
existence.
Participation in private corporations, public
agencies, or non-profit institutions for ongoing
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
research activities related to thesis research.
ESM 599: Research
Students will be required to have a faculty
coordinator as well as a contact in the outside
Fall and Spring, 1-12 credits, S/U grading
organization, to participate with them in
May be repeated for credit.
regular consultations on the project, and to
submit a final report to both. Not accepted for
ESM 604: Seminar in Ultrasonic
Methods and Internal Friction in Solids credit toward the M.S. degree.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

Review of advanced measurement techniques
in the field of ultrasonics coupled with
quantitative descriptions of experimental
variables related to the sample microstructure.
Applications to optical, electrical, and
mechanical properties are discussed. Use of

1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ESM 696: Special Topics in Materials
Science

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Supervised reading and discussion of selected
publications in particular fields of Materials
Science. This course is designed primarily
for advanced graduate students who are, or
expect to be, involved in research in these
areas, although other students may enroll with
permission of the instructor.
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ESM 697: Materials Science
Colloquium
A weekly series of lectures and discussions by
visitors, local faculty, and students presenting
current research results.
Fall and Spring, 0-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ESM 698: Practicum in Teaching
Fall and Spring, 0-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ESM 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Prerequisite: Advancement to candidacy (G5).
Major portion of research must take place on
SBU campus, at Cold Spring Harbor, or at the
Brookhaven National Lab.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.
ESM 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
Fall, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ESM 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or U.S.
provinces.
Domestic students have the option of the
health plan and may also enroll in MEDEX.
International students who are in their home
countries are not covered by the mandatory
health plan and must contact the Insurance
Office for the insurance charge to be removed.
International students who are not in their
home countries are charged for the mandatory
83

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
health insurance. If they are to be covered by
other insurance plans they must file waivers
by the second week of classes. The charge
will only be removed if the other plans are
deemed comparable. All international students
must receive clearance from an International
Advisor.
Fall, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ESM 800: FULL TIME SUMMER RSH
May be repeated for credit.

Spring 2021
A discussion of the evidence that comet and
asteroid impacts have played a significant
part in the evolution of the Earth, and other
planets of the solar system, as well as an
assessment of the actual and perceived hazard
posed by terrestrial impacts and discussion
of what can be done about it. Research report
required. This course is intended for science
teachers and science education students and
requires knowledge of trigonometry, algebra
and introductory college level physics. Offered
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

ESS

ESS 524: The Universe
The origin, evolution, and ultimate fate of the
Earth and Space Sciences
universe. The course begins with a historical
approach with emphasis on the evolution
ESS 501: Foundations of Earth Science
of cosmological ideas from geocentric
Comprehensive analysis of the New York
universes to the Big Bang. Consideration of
State Earth Science Curriculum taught by an
the evolution of the universe from the earliest
experienced Earth Science teacher. This course moments after the Big Bang to the distant
is intended for science teachers and science
future, including the formation of the galaxies,
education students.
stars, and planets. Research report required.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) This course is intended for science teachers
and science education students and requires
ESS 511: Pine Barrens Sustainability
knowledge of trigonometry, algebra and
introductory college level physics.
The ecologically diverse Long Island Pine
Barrens region provides a habitat for a large
Co-scheduled with AST 304 The Universe.
number of rare and endangered species, but
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
faces challenges associated with protection of etc.)
a natural ecosystem that lies in close proximity
to an economically vibrant urban area that
ESS 532: Atmospheric Fundamentals
exerts intense development pressure. In this
This course considers: the principles of
course we will consider the interaction of
atmospheric thermodynamics to assess
the ecological, developmental and economic
adiabatic and saturated adiabatic processes;
factors that impact the Pine Barrens and the
the concepts of radiative transfer such as
effectiveness of decision support systems in
blackbody radiation, scattering, absorption,
promoting sustainability of the Pine Barrens.
and emission by molecules and particles will
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
be discussed; tropospheric and stratospheric
chemistry with its subsequent effects on air
ESS 522: The Planets
pollution and chemical cycles; meteorological
physical concepts such as geostrophic and
A study of present knowledge of planets and
gradient winds, and general circulation; and
their satellites, the interplanetary medium,
the microphysics of cloud formation and
asteroids, meteorites, comets, and the Sun.
precipitation. Research report required. This
Emphasizes the methods of science including
course is intended for science teachers and
the history of astronomical sciences, ongoing
science education students.
deep-space missions, modern astronomical
instrumentation, and exoplanet discoveries.
Offered
Emphasis will be placed on topics contained
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
in the Earth Science curriculum in New
York State. A research report is required.
ESS 533: Global Climate
This course is intended for science teachers
This course explores the fundamental physical
and science education students and requires
processes associated with various weather
knowledge of trigonometry, algebra and
phenomena: tropical cyclones, extratropical
introductory college level physics.
cyclones, fronts, convective storms, and local
Offered
air-sea and mountain flows. The latest analysis
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) techniques, datasets, and tools will be used
to understand the climatology and structural
ESS 523: Collisions in the Solar
evolution of these weather phenomena. Basic
System
forecasting techniques will be applied using
observations and numerical model output.
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Research report required. This course is
intended for science teachers and science
education students.
Offered
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESS 534: Air Pollution and Control
This course provides an overall picture of air
pollution caused by gas phase species and
airborne particulate matter. The sources of air
pollution and the transport of air pollutants will
be discussed. We will study the underlying
chemical processes which can lead to the
formation of secondary air pollutants. Their
effect on an urban, regional, and global
scale and on human health will be assessed.
National and international air quality policy
regulations will be discussed. The causes and
consequences of the stratospheric ozone hole
will be outlined. The international efforts in
form of policy protocols to stop stratospheric
ozone depletion will be discussed. The natural
greenhouse effect will be introduced and our
current understanding of global warming will
be presented. Research report required. This
course is intended for science teachers and
science education students.
Offered
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ESS 536: Principles of Weather
Analysis and Forecasting
This course explores the fundamental physical
processes associated with various weather
phenomena: tropical cyclones, extratropical
cyclones, fronts, convective storms, and local
air-sea and mountain flows. The latest analysis
techniques, datasets, and tools will be used
to understand the climatology and structural
evolution of these weather phenomena. Basic
forecasting techniques will be applied using
observations and numerical model output.
Research report required. This course is
intended for science teachers and science
education students.
Offered
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ESS 541: Earth's Surficial Environment
This course includes creating and using
topographic maps, weathering, soil
development, stream systems, groundwater,
glacial geology, mass movement, erosion and
deposition,. Instruction will include lectures
and laboratory exercises. Research report
required. This course is intended for science
teachers and science education students.
Offered
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
84

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
ESS 542: Tectonic Environment
The use of maps in recognizing, describing
and interpreting tectonic features in New York
State and around the world; understanding the
origin of structural features of the earth's crust
and interior; using seismic data to understand
the tectonic significance of earthquakes and
to describe the earth materials through which
seismic waves travel; and understanding the
role of plate tectonics in the earth's geologic
evolution. Instruction will include lectures and
laboratory exercises. Research report required.
This course is intended for science teachers
and science education students. Offered
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
ESS 543: Rocks and Minerals
Identification, properties, formation and
occurrence of rock-forming minerals:
characterizing igneous, sedimentary and
metamorphic rocks including the diverse
geologic settings in which they occur
with emphasis on their occurrence in the
Metropolitan New York area. Instruction will
include lectures and laboratory exercises.
Research report required. This course is
intended for science teachers and science
education students.
Offered
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ESS 544: Geology of New York
The course will explore the geologic
development of New York from the
Mesoprfoterozoic to the present and will
also explore how the rocks were dated using
radiometric methods and fossils. Research
report required. This course is intended
for science teachers and science education
students.

Spring 2021
Summer, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ESS 600: Independent Research
This course is required for students in MAT
Earth Science and MS in Geosciences with
a concentration in Earth and Space Sciences
to document that the student has completed
an independent research project as part of a
graduate earth science academic or research
course.
S/U grading
ESS 601: Topics in Earth and Space
Sciences
This course is intended for science teachers or
science education students.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ESS 610: Capstone Project in Earth
and Space Sciences
This required capstone project considers
unifying themes or "big ideas" such as scale
and structure, models, stability, and change,
systems and interactions, energy and time
as they apply to astronomy, atmospheric
science and geology. This capstone course
integrates "big ideas" across the earth and
space sciences. Students should have taken at
least two undergraduate or graduate courses in
each of astronomy, atmospheric science and
geology.
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

EST
Technology and Society

Offered
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

EST 500: Foundations of Educational
Technology for Administrators
This course is designed to teach administrators
basic principles surrounding educational
ESS 585: Directed Studies
technology throughout the school and/or
Special studies directed by various faculty
district. Students will explore and discuss
members to be taken for variable and repetitive
critical issues surrounding technology
credit.
in education. Students will understand
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-3 credits, Letter
administrative technology applications, web
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
2.0 presentation tools, Internet protocol, cyber
May be repeated for credit.
safety and cyber bullying, Google Apps, social
networking, collaboration tools, portable
ESS 589: Research for Earth Science
devices and apptivities. The semester project
Teachers
for this course is the development of a needs
This course is intended to provide science
assessment and research of an educational
teachers or graduate students in the Science
technology for your school/district.
Education program an opportunity to obtain
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
research experience. A written report is
required.
EST 501: Educational Technology
Integration for Administrators
Fall, Spring and
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

This course is designed to teach administrators
how to integrate educational technology
within their school/district. Students will
understand ISTE Technology Standards for
Administrators, the National Technology Plan
and the Common Core Standards in relation
to educational technology. Students will
explore distance education, media streaming
and communication tools such as Twitter and
Facebook. They will review management
systems, data collection/analysis tools and
technology funding resources. Students
will also learn how to evaluate technology
integration throughout their school and/or
district. The semester project for this course
is the development of an implementation
plan and the evaluation of an educational
technology that may be used in your school or
district.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 508: Projects in Global Operations
Management
This is a capstone course. Students will
demonstrate what they have learned during
their masters studies. This course will review
several significant research areas in modern
Global Processing Management Operations.
Topics include Performance Management,
Lean Management, Six Sigma Management
in conjunction with Cloud Computing and
Cloud computing applications. The students
will be given a selected case study and
asked to demonstrate their knowledge by
proposing a comprehensive technical and
management solution. Students will use
software engineering tools such as Data
Flow Diagram (DFD) and Unified Modeling
Language (UML) to analyze and design an
implementation plan using cloud computing
infrastructure, platform and services.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 510: Fundamentals of Technology
in Higher Education
Higher education is impacted by technology
on an ever changing scale. Students are
bringing in new technology every day. This
course will show higher education instructors
what technology is available, how higher
education students are using technology and
offer innovative ways to use that technology
to motivate students to learn. Throughout
the course students learn about best practices
in higher education, a number of web based
productivity and course management tools,
cyber-ethics and digital footprint, organization
of your digital world, collaborating with
technology, social media, virtual worlds as
well as presentation strategies and tools. The
culminating project for this course is the

85

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

research, assessment, analysis and presentation science and technology (ST) and their societal
of a college student profile. Semesters offered aspects. They will learn strategies for assessing
Fall, Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B important questions such as: what should I
focus my efforts on, where are societal needs,
+, etc.)
what policies are required or can be taken
advantage of, how can I possibly influence
EST 511: Infusing Technology into
policy, and finally, what are the dangers
Higher Education Curriculum
when developing new ST. To teach these
The power of technology allows higher
topics the course takes a practical approach.
education instructors to teach and motivate
The first section of the sequence examines
students to learn in ways never thought
historical science and technology successes
possible. This course will show students
and failures. Then, in the second section, teams
how to fully integrate technology into the
curriculum. For the semester project, students composed of students from both the CS and
DTS departments conduct case studies of
will review and modernize an existing course
existing ST or design and implement new ST
to make learning more effective and exciting
under the perspectives of the course. 1 credit
for the higher education student. Students
will learn the best way to update courses
by understanding different instructional
design models, content management systems
and the Google Apps for Education suite.
Students will enhance his/her web presence
and digital profile by harnessing the power of
social media and personal learning networks.
Students will also explore potential technology
grant opportunities for his/her curriculum,
department or instructional area. Semesters
offered,

1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

EST 521: The Social and Global Impact
of Technology in Education
This course will explore educational systems
and practices globally and how the use or lack
of use of technology within education impacts
society. Inversely students will research
how society dictates the use or lack of use of
technology in education within the specified
educational system. Throughout the course,
Fall, Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B students will focus on one region of the world
and research the current educational system
+, etc.)
and specifically how they use technology
within education. In their research they
EST 516: Science for Society I
will find out what technology is available
This is part one of an interdisciplinary course
within the educational system, how that
sequence (1 credit each) is designed for
students in computer science (CS) and students technology is used, explore the effectiveness
of the technology and research the social
of technology and society (DTS). Students
impact of that technology use. Students will
taking this course will enhance their abilities
connect with a global participant via distance
to critically think and build awareness for
science and technology (ST) and their societal communication or video conferencing to
aspects. They will learn strategies for assessing gain real world knowledge of the educational
system and the use of technology for the
important questions such as: what should I
focus my efforts on, where are societal needs, specified region. The culminating project is a
research based project that assesses the use of
what policies are required or can be taken
technology within the selected global region,
advantage of, how can I possibly influence
offers solutions on how to improve the use
policy, and finally, what are the dangers
of technology and compares that system and
when developing new ST. To teach these
the use of technology with our own use of
topics the course takes a practical approach.
technology locally in our current educational
The first section of the sequence examines
system.
historical science and technology successes
and failures. Then, in the second section, teams Fall, Spring, and Summer, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
composed of students from both the CS and
DTS departments conduct case studies of
EST 522: Integrating Educational
existing ST or design and implement new ST
Technology into Social Studies and
under the perspectives of the course. 1 credit
Language Arts
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Students will learn how to integrate technology
into Social Studies and Language Arts
EST 517: Science for Society II
curriculum using the ISTE/NETs standards
This is part two of an interdisciplinary course
and National Technology Plan to aid in the
sequence (1 credit each) is designed for
students in computer science (CS) and students delivery of instruction. Students will develop
a push-in training model focused on the Social
of technology and society (DTS). Students
Studies and Language Arts Core Curriculum
taking this course will enhance their abilities
and subject related needs. Students will
to critically think and build awareness for
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

meet with a Social Studies and Language
Arts educator, assess their needs, design
an educational technology push-in around
those needs and push-in the training with
the educator to their class. The culminating
activity for this course is to conduct the pushin training with a Social Studies and Language
Arts educator and their class. After the push-in
training students will work with the instructor
to evaluate the delivery and content of the
lesson as well as assess the outcome and
results of educator learning.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 523: Integrating Educational
Technology into Mathematics and
Science
Students will learn how to integrate technology
into Math and Science curriculum using ISTE/
NETs standards and the National Technology
Plan to aid in the delivery of instruction.
Students will develop an educational
technology workshop focused on the Math and
Science Core Curriculum and subject related
needs. Students will meet with a group of
Math and Science educators, asses their needs,
design an educational technology workshop
around those needs and deliver the workshop
to the educators. The culminating activity
for this course is to conduct the developed
workshop to a group of Math and Science
educators. After the delivery of the workshop,
students will work with the instructor and
classmates to evaluate the delivery and content
of the lesson as well as assess the outcome and
results of educator learning.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 524: The Role of Educational
Technology Specialist
In this course students will learn the role and
responsibilities of an Educational Technology
Specialist. Students will connect with an
administrator and work with the course
instructor to develop a year-long technology
integration plan. The development of the plan
will include: a data driven needs assessment
based on current goals and technology
available, use of that data to address specific
technology/curriculum needs, the integration
plan proposal, creation of a professional
development plan using workshops, push-ins
or one-on-one sessions to deliver instruction
and a peer evaluation of the effectiveness
of the proposed technology integration
plan. In addition, students will learn how to
infuse the ISTE Standards and the National
Technology Plan into the curriculum, research
new technologies and educational resources,
and understand the social, political, ethical
86

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
and legal issues surrounding educational
technology.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring 2021
completion of the portfolio with a screencast
and the submission of the application to
Google. This class cannot be used to satisfy
master¿s degree requirements.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

EST 525: Google for Education:
Foundations
Google for Education (GfE) is a powerful suite
that now seamlessly integrates into curricula
and district technology goals. In this course,
students will learn the tools necessary to
become a Google Certified Trainer. Students
will create and learn how to use Google for
Education tools in their classroom. They will
also develop a comprehensive knowledge
of a number of different products within
Google Apps including - Drive, Calendar,
Gmail, Sites, Classroom and more. Students
will focus on skills necessary to become a
Google Certified Trainer through hands-on
coursework, review and preparation for the
Google for Education Exams. The culminating
activities for this course are a showcase
of best practices highlighting Google for
Education tools, the preliminary work for
your portfolio, and the completion of the
certification requirements. This class cannot be
used to satisfy master's degree requirements.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 526: Google for Education:
Curriculum Integration
In this course, students will learn how to fully
integrate the Google for Education products
beyond the core apps, including Google
Groups,Earth, Scholar, Blogger, and Google
+. Students will complete the Google modules
as well as they develop their portfolio. They
will begin to deliver training by conducting a
live webinar session which highlights Google
tools or apps and sharing best practices. The
culminating activities for this course are the
development of a portfolio highlighting the
lessons or trainings they conducted throughout
this program. This class cannot be used to
satisfy master¿s degree requirements.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 527: Google for Education:
Professional Development
Students will explore educational best
practices and examples of materials needed
to submit the application to become a Google
Certified Trainer. Students will thoroughly
review Google for Education best practices,
organize additional training materials and
create their portfolio. Through the delivery of
training sessions or lessons, students will focus
on the power of Google for Education tools
and their use in PK-12 education. Students
will also create, run their own workshop.
The culminating activity of this course is the

EST 528: Teaching with Interactive
Whiteboards and Immersive
Technologies
Interactive whiteboards and other immersive
technologies have changed the way educators
deliver instruction. They are a technology
that has enormous potential to impact student
learning in a hands-on, kinesthetic way.
Throughout this course students will explore
best practices using immersive technologies
within education. Students will learn how to
effectively integrate interactive whiteboards,
interactive projectors and cameras, learner
responses systems, document cameras as well
as other technologies. The culminating project
for this course a comprehensive lesson plan
utilizing immersive technology hardware and
the associated software within the curriculum.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 529: Supporting Common
Core Standards Using Educational
Technology
In this course students will learn how to
support Common Core Standards through
the infusion of educational technology by
identifying, sharing, and exploring technology
tools that support all curricula. Students
will unpack the Common Core Standards
and analyze and discuss best practices
that effectively integrate technology to
promote rigorous teaching and learning.
The culminating assignment for this course
is the design, delivery, reflection, revision
and presentation of your technology infused
Common Core lessons
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 530: Internet Electronic
Commerce
Topics addressed in this course include:
technology infrastructure, business models
and concepts, technological skills needed to
build an E-Commerce web site, marketing,
communications, security and encryption,
payment systems in E-Commerce/Mcommerce. Financial transactions, advertising
models, content ownership and the prospects
for E-Commerce are also covered.
Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
EST 531: Virtual Distance Management
Course

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

In today's global corporations, the challenges
associated with leadership and management
has grown increasingly difficult and
complex. More and more, companies are
using networked organizational models to
deliver work and interact with customers.
As globalization and diffused networks
of people and companies combine, issues
related to virtual/distributed employees,
partners and customers have moved front
and center. Implications for leadership has
grown beyond current skill sets drawn from
traditional academic fields and training
programs. The Virtual Distance Management
course offers business students a powerful
model and a set of proven practices to address
these challenges in a unique way. Students
will learn to: Understand and diagnose
barriers to effective communication Develop
ways to work with others using virtual
technologies and social media Contribute
to high performance, cross-discipline and
cross-cultural teams Management strategies
for the globally distributed workforce
Virtual Distance, pioneered by Karen
Sobel Lojeski, is a conceptual as well as
quantitative approach that helps to explain
organizational behavior changes when much
of our communications are electronically
mediated. Understanding these changes and
how they impact organizational outcomes
is critical to leaders and managers around
the world. During this course, students will
be exposed to both theoretical models and
real-life case studies to more fully develop
knowledge and skills for working in the
digital age. Students will gain an in-depth
understanding of Virtual Distance and how this
growing phenomenon impacts critical success
factors such as productivity, innovation,
and employee engagement and satisfaction.
Students will also get hands-on experience
with Virtual Distance Index data. Drawing
from over 700 project teams from around the
world, students will learn how to interpret
Virtual Distance data
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 534: The Lean Launch Pad:
Turning a great idea into a great
company
This course provides real world, hands-on
learning of what it's like to actually start a
high-tech company. This class is not about
how to write a business plan, and the end result
is not a PowerPoint presentation to venture
capitalists. Instead, students will get their
hands dirty talking to customers, partners
and competitors as they encounter the chaos
and uncertianty of how a startup actually
works. Students work in teams learning how
to turn a great idea into a great company.
87

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
They will learn how to use a business model
to brainstorm each part of a company and
customer development to get out of the
classroom to see whether anyone other than
themselves would want/use their product.
Finally, they will see how agile development
can help them rapidly iterate their product to
build something customers will use and buy.
Offered in Fall and Spring.

Spring 2021
EST 542: Water and Wastewater
Engineering Practices
This course will provide basic engineering
concepts and practices associated with water
supply and wastewater management, with
an emphasis on New York metropolitan area
technologies. Topics covered will include
water supply and distribution, wells, water
quality testing and regulation, onsite, package
and standard wastewater treatment, and
stormwater collection. Policy issues considered
will include source water protection and
wastewater impact mitigation programs.

and urban infrastructure systems. A series
of problem sets is undertaken in close
coordination with the instructor to produce a
portfolio of networked research which, with
further research, can be publishable quality.
Offered
Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

EST 551: The Atom and Environmental
Radiation in the Nuclear Age
EST 535: Electric Power Systems
This course will address technical and societal
This course introduces concepts in the design
aspects relating to nuclear power and the
and operation of electric power systems
Offered in Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, general issue of environmental radioactivity.
including generation with focus on renewable B+, etc.)
It will cover basics of the nuclear industry and
power, transmission and distribution, and
the nature of radioactivity. This includes the
end use; key issues and challenges facing
production, storage, and disposal of diverse
EST 546: Integrating Technology,
electric power industry. Topics include
radionuclides emanating from the nuclear
Policy and Financing Instruments to
electric and magnetic circuits, fundamental
fuel cycle and nuclear weapons testing. The
Catalyze Climate Finance
of electric power, circuit and load analysis,
properties of major radionuclides will be
The sums involved in a shift to a low-carbon
reliability, planning, dispatch, integration
explored. The course will also consider the
society are daunting but not impossible to
of renewable power, organizational design,
complex issue of biological risks posed by
achieve. The world is planning to invest
regulations, environment, end-use efficiency,
radionuclides at different doses to living
over $15 trillion in fixed-asset investments
new technologies, and other cross-cutting
organisms, including man. Economic and
in the next 10 years. Rather a problem of
issues
political constraints on nuclear power
capital generation, the key challenge of
generation will be discussed for the US
financing the transition towards a low carbon
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
and other countries, as will the actual and
society is to redirect existing and planned
perceived risks associated with environmental
EST 540: Environmental Management
capital flows from traditional high-carbon
radioactivity.
to low-carbon investments. This course is
This is an introduction to environmental
designed to allow students to: (1) Review
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
management, and will focus on the interplay
a number of public policies, public finance
between science and public policy. Concepts
EST 553: Nuclear Security
mechanisms and market-based instruments
include problem identification and definition,
designed
to
shift
investments
from
fossil
fuels
collection and analysis of relevant data
The course will familiarize students with the
to more climate friendly alternatives over the
to produce information, and the roles of
fundamentals of nuclear physics, radiation,
past few years; (2) Gain knowledge of the
public perception and action in ultimately
mining, weapons and fuel cycle, other than
global commercial, political, innovation and
determining outcomes when consensus is
producing electricity, as it pertains to nuclear
technological challenges and opportunities
not reached. Specific fields to which these
power plants. Topics include nuclear detection,
in the transition to a low-carbon society;
concepts will be applied will be solid waste
devices to safeguard nuclear materials from
management and coastal management. Current (3) Develop and practice professional skills
terrorist threats, needed physical protection for
in raising and spending public finance to
local problems will be used to illustrate the
safe handling and its relevance to Homeland
catalyze capital towards low carbon and
broader conceptual issues. Offered as MAR
Security. The course combines lectures
climate resilient development; and (4)
514, EST 540 and CEY 501. Prerequisite:
with hands-on experience at the newly
Develop and practice professional skills
Permission of instructor
installed nuclear detection facility located
at the nearby United States Department of
Offered in Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, in accessing carbon finance and designing
innovative
financing
instruments.
This
course
Energy's Brookhaven National Laboratory.
A-, B+, etc.)
is aimed at engineering students who are
Prerequisite: Undergraduate equivalent physics
interested in the energy challenges in a carbon- and chemistry.
EST 541: Long Island's Groundwater
constrained world and their implications to
Fall, Spring, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B
This course will cover basic groundwater
technology innovation; at business-and public- +, etc.)
concepts in unconsolidated sediments, and
examine contamination issues in light of Long administration students and at mid-career
professionals who want to develop innovative EST 554: Chemical & Biological
Island's particular hydrogeology, land use,
Weapons: Safeguards and Security
and waste management history. Mathematical financing solutions to real-world energy and
environmental problems. Offered: Summer
principles will be discussed but not stressed;
This course deals with the fundamentals of
Fall, Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B chemistry and biochemistry related to chemical
scientific and technical papers discussing
+, etc.)
particular concepts or problems, including
weapons (CW) and biological weapons (BW)
important local examples, will be closely read.
that could be used by terrorists. Topics include
EST 547: Advanced Problems in
CW and BW history, production, control,
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. Offered
Integrated Planning: Theory, Practice,
detection, identification, and emergency
as MAR 521 or HPH 673.
and Analytical Tools
response measures to deal with intended or
Offered in Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
This course explores in depth new theories and unintended release and escape, and security
B+, etc.)
practical applications of integrated planning
measures to protect and control stockpiles.
through the lens and land use, transportation
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

88

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Prerequisite: Undergraduate equivalent
chemistry, biochemistry, and microbiology.
Fall, Spring, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B
+, etc.)
EST 555: Preventing Weapons
Proliferation
The student will learn: what some of the
key international tools to stem weapons
proliferation are, how they have developed
over the last 50 years, and how they work;
the kinds of technologies used to develop
nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons &
missile delivery systems; and the complexities
& methods of controlling these technologies.
The student will also learn about the use of
UN Security Council sanctions, and about
multilateral [e.g., EU, ECOWAS) and national
sanctions; and about how interdicting illicit
transfers does or does not work. The course
will emphasize how technology, international
law, and international and domestic politics all
play important roles in the evolution, current
practice, and effectiveness of the international
nonproliferation regime.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 556: Nuclear Nonproliferation &
International Safeguards
The student will learn the history of the
nuclear nonproliferation regime since 1946,
with emphasis on the evolution of concepts
& practice. The student will also learn the
variety and complexity of motivations for
governments to seek nuclear weapons, and in
many cases, to foreswear nuclear weapons.
The course will emphasize how nuclear
energy technologies, verification technologies,
international legal practice, and politics all
play important roles in the evolution, current
practice, and effectiveness of the international
nuclear nonproliferation regime.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 557: Nuclear Energy-the nuclear
fuel cycle & technologies
Nuclear energy has many applications beyond
the well known (and controversial) civil
nuclear power plant. These applications
include medical and industrial isotope
production, research reactors, particle
accelerators, propulsion reactors, and nuclear
weapons. Supporting these applications is
a complex infrastructure involving several
diverse scientific, engineering, and industrial
processes. One of the key processes is the
nuclear fuel cycle, involved principally in
civil nuclear power and related civil nuclear
activities, from uranium mining to spent
fuel reprocessing. However, the same set
of technologies can be used to manufacture
nuclear weapons ¿ thus these technologies

Spring 2021
become a double-edged sword. This course
provides a comprehensive first look at this
complex of technologies for those interested in
nuclear weapons proliferation, nuclear energy,
or nuclear safety. It is directed at those with
no foundation in nuclear physics or nuclear
engineering, but who seek to understand these
technologies in terms well beyond those of
the layman, but short of the nuclear engineer.
Individuals interested in taking this course
should have completed a course in algebra.
Students should be familiar and comfortable
working with exponents and logarithms.
Higher levels of math such as calculus will not
be utilized in this course.

EST 560: Risk Assessment,
Regulation, and Homeland Security
The course focus is on risk assessment
associated with nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons as it relates to Homeland
Security. Topics include air dispersion,
uncertainty analysis, exposure measurements,
epidemiology, toxicology, regulatory issues,
risk management, risk communication,
risk perception, and risk preparedness. The
course will also cover laws and regulation,
discouraging terrorism, and disaster
preparedness, various acts passed by the U.S.
Congress to regulate water, air, and controlled
substances. Offered as EST 560 or HPH 656.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Prerequisite: Undergraduate or equivalent
physics, math and chemistry.
Fall and Spring, 4 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)

EST 558: Digital technologies in
disaster risk reduction
The course explores the use of a variety of
sensing technologies for public safety and
disaster management and risk reduction.
These include national and commercially
available satellites, manned and unmanned
aerial "drone" systems (sUAS), closed
circuit cameras, small-footprint remotesensor monitor"tng in wireless networks,
and a wide number of IP-based (loT)
systems. Technically, the course starts
with the fundamental character"1stics of
electromagnetic radiation and how these
energies interact with Earth materials such
as vegetation, water, soil and rock, as well as
humans. It describes how the energy reflected
or emitted from these materials is recorded
using a variety of sensing instruments (e.g.,
cameras, multispectral scanners, hyperspectral
instruments, RADAR). The course also teaches
how to interpret fundamental biophysical or
land use information from the sensor data. The
history of sensing technologies, the principles
of visual photo-interpretation, and issues of
surveillance are also presented.

EST 561: Sensing Technologies for
Disater Risk Reduction
This graduate seminar will survey the
main topics in the emerging field of digital
technology management for disaster risk
reduction. Throughout it will introduce
relevant theoretical concepts and relate them
to policies and practices. Topics will include
the evolution of next-generation public
safety networks, related digital technologies
such as robotics, augmented and virtual
reality, big data, mobility, innovation and
entrepreneurship as well as conceptual
approaches to distorters and the relationship
of disaster to broader environment and
sustainable development issues. Departmental
faculty and guest lecturers from partner
organization (UN office for Disaster Risk
Reduction, Korean Red Cross, International
Federation of Red Cross Red Crescent
Societies, SafeNet Forum) will participate.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

EST 562: Decision Support Systems
A decision support system (DSS) is a computer
EST 559: Mobile Revolution in Disaster
system that combines, data, analytical tools,
Risk Reduction
and models to support decision making. A
This course will explore three themes: [1]
DSS may be model-driven or data-driven. A
current and future trends of development
model-driven DSS is a stand- alone system that
and digital information technology toward
uses some type of model to perform ¿whatmobility, [2] combined with many other
if¿ and other kinds of analysis. A data- driven
technologies increasingly repurposed and
DSS is a system that supports decision making
adapted toward mobility and sustainability
by allowing users to extract and analyze useful
(wearable, lOT), [3] along with skills required information that was previously buried in large
for employing such arrangements effectively
databases. In this course, both model-driven
toward the part they play in risk assessment
and data-driven decision support services
and in advancing risk reduction whether in
will be considered. Students will identify
natural hazards and/or human disasters and
an appropriate engineering or management
inequitable development.
application. By collecting relevant data,
building suitable mathematical models,
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
designing an accessible user interface, and
connecting these components via computer

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

89

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

code, students will develop a deliverable DSS.
Through a series of presentations, they will
demonstrate how their DSS addresses the
stated engineering or management problem.
In doing so, students will gain insight into the
interrelationships among information systems,
statistics and management science.

behind modern communication systems
and their impact on education as well as
the evolution of the Internet in education.
Students will design and create a website
and explore the use and social impact of
collaborative learning environments and
social networking. Students will learn how
to evaluate and effectively integrate a variety
Prerequisite: EMP 504 or permission of
of educational resources, such as web 2.0
instructor
tools and modern communication devices for
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
active learning. Students will also develop a
etc.)
clear understanding of the issues surrounding
cybersafety, cyberbullying, and the ethical
EST 563: Computer Literacy for
issues raised by the use of technology in
Educators
This course is an introduction to computer and education. The culminating activity for this
software basics and was formally listed as EST course is the development and publishing of
a collaborative website that showcases the
583. Students will develop an understanding
material and skills mastered throughout this
of the underlying concepts and principles
behind computers. Students will gain sufficient course.
knowledge to successfully navigate the digital Fall, Spring, Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
world. Emphasis will focus on computer
literacy areas used in education and other
professional environments. Students will leave EST 568: Networked Communication
Technologies
this course with the ability to grasp the risks
and benefits surrounding new and current
EST 568 Network Communication Wired and
computer technologies. The following skills
Wireless
will be addressed; electronic communication,
This course examines the range of
application-based projects, information
technologies used in teaching, learning, and
management, assessment, and the societal
communication. Instructional technologies
impacts of computer based technologies.
both stand-alone and networked are surveyed
Students having completed EST 565 in a prior with a focus on how they can be used
semester can not receive credit for EST 563.
effectively to enhance learning. Students will
EST 563 and EST 565 may be taken in the
learn fundamental hardware and software
same semester.
principles underlying the development of the
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 565: Foundations of Technology
in Education
Throughout this course students will explore
the basic pedagogical issues and social impact
of using technology in education. This course
examines the basic principles of integrating
technology and computer applications into
the curriculum. Students will learn how to use
and integrate word processing, spreadsheet,
and presentation applications for educator
planning and student project work. Students
will also learn how to use a number of online
based Web 2.0 applications within school
curriculum. The culminating activity for this
course is the design and a presentation of a
micro-lesson using one these applications as
they would in the classroom.
Fall, Spring, Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 567: The Internet, Social
Networking and Collaborative
Environments
In this course students will learn the basic
principles of using the Internet for instruction,
the science and engineering concepts

Internet and other networked communications
tools. Emphasis will be placed on assessment
of these technologies in terms of societal
impacts and learning outcomes. This course
combines topics from EST 565 and EST 567.
Fall, Spring, Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 569: Technology in the City
Will technology transform our cities, making
them more livable, efficient, and desirable?
Will technology erode our cities, making them
more dangerous, chaotic, and insufferable?
This course is at the intersection of two trends.
First, the world is undergoing a wave of urban
growth. Second, the pace of technological
change is quickening and, with it, the pace of
social change and even social transformation.
Course modules will cover technology and
society in urban contexts with particular
attention to: 1) energy, 2) environments, 3)
transportation, and 4) health and human safety
(including security). This class will involve
trips to sites in New York City, and will
involve the use of IT technologies in creative
ways to advance our learning.
Offered Fall, Spring and

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
EST 570: Educational Technology
Lesson Development
In this course students will learn principles of
instructional design and how to fully integrate
technology into daily curriculum. Throughout
the course students will plan, develop and
evaluate a lesson plan that demonstrates an
expertise in the integration of educational
technology. Students will apply the skills,
techniques, resources and research necessary
to effectively create an educational technology
inspired lesson plan. The lesson plan may
include the use of emerging technologies,
distance learning, multimedia projects,
collaborative environments, computer
applications and Internet resources. The
culminating project for this course is the
completion of a lesson plan in a specific
content area that incorporates multiple
modalities of technology into pedagogical
practices.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 571: Educational Technology
Research Methodologies
This course evaluates the impact and value of
educational technology uses through detailed
research based on a number of current topics.
Course goals include understanding research
methodology and literature and exploring
assessment design and implementation.
The course includes class discussions and
project work based on student learning with
technology, access and the digital divide,
the National Education Technology Plan,
Internet literacy, emerging technologies,
virtual schools, and data driven research.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 573: Interactive Multimedia
Curriculum Design and Development
This course allows students to learn how
to use a variety of multimedia tools for the
classroom. Principles of user interface and
interaction design will be covered. Throughout
the course students design an interactive unit
plan using multimedia authoring software.
Students will work with audio/video editing
software, collaborative learning software, and
learn how to embed online games, activities
and video within their unit plan. Development
of the interactive multimedia unit requires
students to: submit a proposal, use graphic
organizers to plan and design, create a draft
version, create assessment tools, test market
with a specific target audience, then evaluate
the unit before the final version is completed.
The culminating activity is the presentation
90

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

and delivery of the finished interactive
multimedia unit.

Due to the complex nature of environmental
and spatial data, these systems require stateof-the-art computer technology to achieve
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 3 credits, Letter
environmental science and information
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
technology. This course will address the
EST 574: Distance Learning and Virtual technical and conceptual bases of data capture,
data storage, data analysis and decision
Environments
support, and metadata management.
Web-based distance learning applications
This course will address the technical and
are quickly growing within higher education
conceptual bases of data capture, data
institutions, K-12 schools, and corporate
storage, data analysis and decision support,
environments. The focus of this course
and metadata management. Environmental
is on the underlying theories, design, and
Information Systems are concerned with the
implementation of effective modes of elearning. Students will explore virtual schools, management of data about the rock of soil, the
water, the air, and the species around us.
virtual learning, virtual environments and
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
other forms of distance education. The
etc.)
social differences between face-to-face and
May be repeated for credit.
virtual learning will also be examined and
discussed throughout the course. Students
EST 578: Human-Computer Interaction
will explore virtual learning resources and
Design for Construction
design their own virtual learning lesson. The
culminating project for this course will be the
Principles of human-computer interaction
demonstration and write up of the experience. applied to the design of educational
courseware. Usability engineering, with a
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 3 credits, Letter
focus on the audience and learning objectives.
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Interface design principles. Human computer
dialogs. Multimedia as a communication tool,
EST 575: Developing Grants and
using images, audio and video. Multimodal
Managing Projects
input devices and strategies. Students will
This course will develop the skills necessary
use a multimedia authoring tool to create a
to take a program proposal from idea through
reality with an emphasis on new technological prototype of an educational application or
learning tool.
resources available to help with this process.
Topics include: techniques for successful
fundraising, grant writing, program design,
staffing, publicity and outreach, and reporting
and evaluation. It is designed for current
educators and administrators as well as
students about to enter the education, social
service and health fields.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 576: Geographic Information
Systems in Education and Research
Students use Geographic Information Systems
(GIS) software to create, manipulate and
interpret layers of interactive maps and
databases. Students collect and modify
geographical materials from the Internet,
satellite and aerial imagery, and field data.
They design and test scientific inquiry-driven
educational modules and/or visualizations
for research and analysis on global and local
geography, for use in economics, earth science,
politics and civic action, history and sociology,
global studies, and environmental planning and
assessment. Prerequisite: EST 565 or EST 595
or permission of instructor.)
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
EST 577: Environmental Information
Systems (EIS)

interactions, technology innovation and
management, technology forecasting, impact
assessment, technology valuation, and basic
tools for technology assessment (monitoring,
simulation, expert opinion, scenario analysis,
cost-benefit analysis, AHP method, etc.).
Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
EST 581: Heuristics and Quantitative
Decision-Making
Complex problems (choices) need to be
resolved in the course of socio-technical
processes. Quantitative decision-making
techniques have been evolved to address
these situations. We will investigate a
number of these techniques in detail, in order
to understand the advantages that can be
gained by using them. We will also discuss
common criticisms and issues associated with
these methods, and consider the heuristic
methods that are often used instead to resolve
complicated problems.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

EST 579: Educational Games
Simulations and computer games as a learning
tool. Traditional game and simulation genres,
and their appropriate uses in education.
Gameplay design. Game development process,
from storyboarding to delivery. Assessing
games as learning tools. Students will use a
multimedia tool to prototype an educational
game or simulation of their own design.

EST 582: Introduction to Systems
Concepts
Understanding phenomena as "systems"
requires some changes in overall analytical
approaches, and a new vocabulary. General
systems theory concepts such as feedback,
stability, tipping point, resilience, recursion,
hierarchy, and complexity will be discussed,
with regard to complex systems drawn from
nature, business, technology, and education.
The course will address the use of feedback,
information and communication, structure,
and cybernetics in the management of
complex systems. The role and importance
of "agents" in current systems thinking will
be emphasized. Students will prepare a study
of a complex system and its management
incorporating these general concepts.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

EST 580: Advanced Technology
assessment: Business, Government
and Strategy
This course has a two-fold objective: (1)
to help students develop strong conceptual
foundations for understanding and addressing
issues at the intersection of science,
technology, public policy, and business
strategy; and (2) to provide students with
knowledge of analytical frameworks and tools
that are essential to technology assessment
in business, government, and government,
and other organizations with understanding
of their strengths, limitations, and underlying
assumptions. Topics covered include utility/
profit maximization theory, its limitations and
alternative theories, business and government

EST 583: National Energy Decision
Making
Today's decision about fuel exports, power
plant siting, and R&D support for emergent
technologies often hinge on underlying
priorities tied to self-sufficiency and markets,
among possibilities. Such dimensions are
examined in this graduate course through the
lens of diverse players in the national energy
system. Competing interests in infrastructure,
cost, equity, and societal buy-in will be
evaluated with technology systems and policy
frameworks. Takeaways will provide a basis
for work in the private or public sector.
Graduate Students in engineering and science,
social sciences and humanities, as well as

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

91

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

management are encouraged to join. Semesters The ample supply and appropriate use of
Offered: Fall
energy is critical to the well being of human
society. Energy plays an enormous role in
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
environmental degradation, national insecurity,
EST 585: Assessment of Technology in international conflict, and in solutions to these
problems. This course aims to introduce the
Learning Environments
major energy issues to students in engineering,
This course is designed to provide educators
business, and public policy areas. It discusses
with an overview of the uses of technology
the energy choices to meet regional and
to improve instruction. Students will
understand the design and function of learning global energy needs. Major renewable and
conventional energy sources, energy supply
environments, individual applications related
technologies, and end-use efficiency options
to the student's area of professional practice,
will be assessed in the context of political,
and assessment of educational uses of
technology today and tomorrow. Students will social, economic, and environmental goals.
chose a current technology used in a specific
learning environment and analyze and evaluate
its effectiveness within instruction including
practical classroom use and staff development
for the particular technology. Students will
then research and make recommendations
on how the particular technology could be
integrated most effectively to increase teacher
understanding and enhance student learning.
Students then present their findings about the
current use of the chosen technology, possible
improvements on its use as well as future
technology recommendations.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 590: Seminar for MS, TSM
Students
This seminar is a forum for the discussion
of research methods, project ideas, proposal
preparation and the written and presentation of
research proposals and results. It is designed
to meet the needs of early career researchers at
both the Masters and Ph.D. level. For Masters
students, final product of this seminar is an
approved master¿s project proposal. Ph.D.
students will present progress on their own
research. All students will participate in peer
review of each others¿ work and learn the
basics of the responsible conduct of research.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 591: Independent Study in
Technology and Society
The primary objective of independent study
is to provide a student with opportunities to
interact with faculty members who can be
of assistance in his or her master's project.
Students should consult individually with
faculty members on workload and credit(s).
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
EST 592: Sustainable Energy:
Technologies, Systems, Markets, and
Policies

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 593: Risk Assessment and Hazard
Management
A case-study approach to the assessment
of risk and the management of natural and
technological hazards, with emphasis on those
that can harm the environment. The course
focuses on technological hazards involving
energy, transportation, agriculture, natural
resources, chemical technology, nuclear
technology, and biotechnology, and on natural
hazards such as climactic changes, droughts,
floods, and earthquakes. The first part of the
course consists of readings on risk assessment
and hazard management and discussions of
published case studies. During the second part
of the course, students conduct Offered as EST
593 or HPH 686.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 594: Diagnosis of Environmental
Disputes
Diagnosis of disagreements about
environmental and waste problems. Tools for
evaluating disputes about (a) scientific theories
and environmental models, (b) definitions
and analytical methodologies for estimating
risk, "real" cost, net energy use, and lifecycle environmental impact, (c) regulatory
and legal policy, (d) siting of controversial
environmental facilities, and (e) fairness and
other ethical issues. These diagnostic tools are
brought to bear upon case studies of pollution
prevention, recycling, nuclear waste disposal,
and climate change.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 595: Principles of Environmental
Systems Analysis
This course is intended for students interested
in learning systems engineering principles
relevant to solving environmental and waste
management problems. Concepts include
compartmental models, state variables,
optimization, and numerical and analytical
solutions to differential equations.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Prerequisites: MAT 132 and one year
of quantitative science such as physics,
chemistry, or geology; or permission of
instructor. Offered as EST 595 or HPH 688.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 597: Waste Management: Systems
and Principles
Students will learn about the technologies
and policy options in waste management,
emphasizing recycling, incineration,
landfilling, and source reduction options
for municipal solid waste on Long Island.
Problems concerning paper, glass, plastic,
organic materials, and other waste stream
components will be explored. Environmental
impacts and economics of landfills, materials
recovery facilities, and waste-to-energy
systems are examined. The institutional
and regulatory climate, current and planned
practices in the region, and hazardous waste
will be discussed. Cross-listed as CEY 597 or
HPH 663 or EST 597.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 598: Teaching Practicum
Designed to give graduate students teaching
experience.
3 credits, S/U grading
EST 599: Special Projects and Topics
A technology assessment laboratory for
emerging problems and focused research. May
be run as a hands-on, group research study
of an important educational, environmental
or waste problem (perhaps to provide
an assessment to a regulatory agency or
administrative system).
1-12 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
EST 600: Technology, Policy, and
Innovation: Theory and Practice
This course provides students with frameworks
and models for analysis of issues at the
intersection of science, technology and public
policy, and business strategy; and helps
students develop skills to work on policy
issues that require deep understanding of
the technical details. Topics include utility/
profit maximization theory, its limitations and
alternative theories, business and government
interactions, technology innovation and
managements, policy process (agenda setting,
problem definition, framing the terms of
debate, formulation and analysis of options,
evaluation of policy outcomes). Cases drawn
from energy and environmental policy,
educational technology, STEM education will
be used to illustrate stakeholders and their
value structures, high levels of uncertainty,
multiple levels of complexity, and their
92

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

influence on policy intervention. This course
emphasizes quantitative policy analysis
methods, and critical thinking.

forms of energy, major energy production,
conversion, and consumption activities,
and technology innovation and transition
Fall, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) embedded in the energy systems. We'll
first discuss the theoretical and empirical
knowledge base and data sources to understand
EST 601: Grand Challenges in Energy
the energy-environmental and climate
and Environmental Policy
The survey course will be taught by the faculty problems. The class will then introduce the
modeling tools and skills to analyze energy
of Technology and Society and provide
systems or individual energy projects so
an introduction to the major energy and
to understand energy systems and enable
environmental issues of our time. The course
evidence based decision making. This class
will take an interdisciplinary perspective
encourage students to design research projects,
drawing from policy, engineering, social
using the modeling tools, and presenting
and physical sciences, the course will cover
results. The objective of this course: Develop
challenges and opportunities related to
comprehensive understanding of energy
society's demand for energy and resources,
systems, i.e. the interaction of technological,
and resulting environmental impacts. It is a
social, economic, and regulatory forces that
required course for all elective for all PhD
shaping energy production, conversion, and
candidates and advanced Masters students
consumption; Gain an understanding of
outside of the energy and environmental
main data sources and key methods used to
program who may take the course with the
analyze energy systems and their strengths and
permission of the senior faculty member
weaknesses; Get introduced to major analytical
responsible for the course. The course will
concepts and modeling tools used in energy
be conducted in a mixture of lecture and
systems and policy analysis; Develop basic
seminar styles. An extensive reading list
analytical skills to translate energy systems
will be provided on each issue. Responsible
analysis into effective policy discussion and
Instructor: Gerald Stokes Co-instructors:
debate. Prerequisite: Some programming
Elizabeth Hewitt, Gang He
knowledge recommended. Offered Spring
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 602: Energy, Technology and
EST 604: Grand Challenges in English,
Society: Energy Nexus Research
Education, Management & Policy
Frontiers
Energy is at the center of the nexus challenges- New technologies are created by and for
people. In this course, we examine how
energy, water, food, land, environment and
that happens¿or fails to happen. We will
development-that human being faces, critical
linkages between those issues demand system examine policies at the organizational,
integrative thinking and of growing interest in community, sectoral, national, and crossresearch and policy communities. This course national levels and how they influence
the lives and work of the many and varied
will provide a deep working knowledge,
people who create, use, benefit from, and
technically and socially, of the energy
suffer from new technologies. We will
technologies, policies, and transition. This
cover six grand challenges in engineering
course will survey the energy nexus concepts
education, management and policy (EEMP):
and principles, introduce tools of analysis,
Educating wisely with technology (i.e.,
and engage students in case studies of critical
energy nexus issues: energy and development, effectively and efficiently); Ensuring
energy and water, energy and food, energy and equity; Sparking and sustaining innovation;
land, energy and environment, and energy and Managing, organizing, and leading engineering
enterprises; Harnessing the power of emerging
climate change. This course aims to explore
technologies; and Coexisting with technology
the frontier of energy nexus research and
to maximize rewards and minimize risks (i.e.,
empower students to contribute in the energy
our individual and collective health, wellnexus debate and policy design.
being, and happiness).
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
etc.)
EST 603: Energy Modeling and Energy
Systems Analysis
"All models are wrong, but some are useful".
This class offers a systems analysis approach
and introduces useful modeling tools to
capture and reveal the complexity of energy
systems. The scope of this class includes main

EST 605: Economics and Public Policy
The course is the first in a two part economics
sequence for students in Technology, Policy,
and Innovation. This first course is designed to
prepare policy analysts to learn the conditions
necessary for markets to function well, and
how the central government intervenes

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

when markets fail. Micro economic tools
are developed and applied to markets for
public goods. The impact of these markets
on the marco economy is also examined. Fall
semester, 3 credits, A,B,C,F
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 606: The Economics of
Technology, Policy, and Innovation
This course is the second in a two part
economics sequence that applies the tools
from Part 1 to evaluate sectors of the economy
related to technology, public goods, and
innovation. Readings cover the literature
related to the cross between public economics
and technology / innovation. Policies related to
technology and innovation enhancements will
be assessed using the criteria of effectiveness,
efficiency, equity, economic growth, and
economic stability. How technology and
innovation impact the economy and industry,
how well advances are being implemented,
will all be examined from the economist¿s
perspective. Pre-Requisite: EST 605,
Economics and Public Policy with a grade of C
+ or better Fall semester, 3 credits, A, B, C, F.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EST 607: Energy and Environmental
Economics and Markets
The landscape of global energy markets
over the past decades has largely driven by
economics and regulations. This course will
draw the theories and tools of economics
and regulations to study the evolution of
the energy and environmental markets and
the policy implications of such evolution.
This course will examine the development
of effect of organized energy markets, the
industry structure and evolution of competition
in the energy and environmental markets,
the political economy of regulation and
deregulation, market power and antitrust,
climate change and environmental policy and
their impacts in energy and environmental
markets. This course will also discuss the
emerging markets for clean energy, energy
efficiency, and transport and storage of energy.
This course aims to analyzing the rationale for
and effects of public policies in energy and
environmental markets.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
EST 610: Data Analysis for
Technology, Policy and Innovation
This course covers many of the common
empirical tools used for research in
Technology, Policy, and Innovation. Topics
include: descriptive statistics, clustering,
discrimination analysis, estimation, hypothesis
testing, and regression analysis. To learn these
93

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

EST 691: Seminar on Innovation,
Invention, and Diffusion
Innovation is viewed as central to progress
for any individual, organization, nation or
global effort. In this seminar we will discuss
invention, the two main phases of innovation,
exploration and exploitation, the notion of
diffusion of innovation and finally innovation
policy as well as policy innovation. We will
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
explore a number of types of innovation
EST 620: Decision Making in Socioincluding radical versus incremental,
Technological and Global Contexts
technological versus administrative, product
Restricted to Ph.D. students registered in the
versus process and more. Using relevant case
Certificate Program on College Teaching.
Methodologies and applications to enhance
Fall and Spring, 0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, studies and selected readings from the most
students' abilities to use qualitative and
influential voices on innovation, including
A-, B+, etc.)
quantitative approaches to examine decision
those in academia, corporate America as
problems within socio-technological and
EST 688: Internship in Research
well as policy-making organizations, we will
global contexts. Psychological, social and
explore the many different sides of innovation,
cultural influences on decision making in
Participation in private corporations,
why it is one of the most critical issues of
organizations. Power and limitations of the
public agencies, or non-profit institutions.
our time and how seminar participants can
theories, models and tools of decision analysis. Students will be required to have a faculty
contribute to overall innovative efforts.
Applications to decision problems in a variety coordinator as well as a contact in the outside
of areas, including energy and environmental
organization to participate with them in regular Offered
systems, educational technology and education consultations on the project, and to submit a
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
in science and engineering, technology
final report to both. At most one credit can be
management, and science and technology
accepted toward the degree.
EST 692: Research Seminar
policy.
This seminar is a forum for the discussion
1-3 credits, S/U grading
of research methods, project ideas, proposal
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
preparation and the written and presentation of
EST 625: Advanced Theory and
EST 690: Seminar in Theory Building
research proposals and results. It is designed
Practice in Technology and Policy
to meet the needs of early career researchers at
Science is about discovering facts as well
both the Masters and Ph.D. level. For Masters
Technology change entails more than the
as explaining what the facts mean. Theories
students, final product of this seminar is an
commercialization of an invention. Likewise,
provide explanations and interpretations
approved master¿s project proposal. Ph.D.
policy making encompasses much more than
of empirical phenomena and building and
students will present progress on their own
cost-benefit analysis and regulation. This
modifying theories are at the heart of core
research. All students will participate in peer
advanced, graduate level course examines
scientific activities. Good theory is essential
review of each others¿ work and learn the
critical theory for both subjects by drawing
to many new fields for several reasons.
basics of the responsible conduct of research.
on ideas from systems and science, policy and First, good theory provides guidance for
management, economics, and STS. Emphasis
practical action and therefore should be
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
is placed on deconstructing theoretical
at the foundation of curricula. Second,
May be repeated for credit.
applications in the context of policy-based
without good theory in any particular field,
problem-solving and innovation objectives.
researchers must borrow theories from other
EST 694: Energy and Buildings:
Topics will include policy cycles, regulatory
academic disciplines. While this can be
Technology, Policy, and Behavior
capture, innovation systems, dimensions of
useful, sometimes these theories might not fit
Graduate Seminar (PhD students preferred;
technology change, and lock-in, among others. our subject matter well. For example social
Masters students welcome w/permission of
Students will develop skills to work in roles at theories based on behavioral assumptions
instructor) Buildings consume vast amounts
the interface of technology and management.
stemming from non-digital communications do of energy and resources, and are one of
not fully address substantive features of social the largest contributors to greenhouse gas
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
behavior in a digital age. Research courses
emissions. Major advances in building design
commonly emphasize empirical research
EST 650: Directed Study
and technology over the past decade have
methods and formal modeling approaches
given us tools to make buildings more energy
Individual studies under the guidance of
to theory development. There is much less
efficient, but buildings lag far behind their
a faculty member. Subject matter varies
guidance for those who want to build a theory potential. There are many avenues to green
according to the needs of the student. May be
for managerial and behavioral studies-Yet
the built environment sector, including
repeated for credit.
every researcher must do so to develop a
technological innovations, occupant behavior
1-9 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
good research proposal. This seminar aims
programs, retrofits of existing buildings,
May be repeated for credit.
to fill that gap by focusing on theory types
and innovative building codes. Ultimately,
and evaluation criteria, theory development
reducing energy consumption in the building
EST 680: Teaching, Learning, and
processes, and theoretical writing.
stock will require an interdisciplinary approach
Technology
Offered in Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, and some combination of a range of program
A professional development seminar that is
and policy types. This course will introduce
A-, B+, etc.)
designed to help Ph.D. students develop the
students to the many interdisciplinary issues
competencies needed to become effective
surrounding energy use in buildings, with
topics, students will use modern statistical
software programs to analyze data sets with
socio-technological applications. After this
course, students will have the tools to conduct
robust data analyses and present the work
in written and visually appealing formats.
This course assumes that students have basic
knowledge of statistics or data analysis.

teachers in colleges and universities. Students
will learn relevant teaching and learning
theories and their applications to teaching
courses and laboratory sessions. Students will
learn methods for the design and assessment
of courses, including courses that integrate
appropriate technologies to enhance learning
and teaching. Students will learn how to
create learning environments that build on the
strengths and address the varied needs of a
diversity of learners.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

94

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
a particular focus on the intersection of
policy with technology, economics, social
science, and behavior. The course will
combine lectures, student-led practicum
discussions, and guest speakers. Possible field
trip(s) to green buildings will be explored,
depending on scheduling. Topics covered
will include: Regulatory schemes such
as tax incentives, mandates, and building
codes,Voluntary certification schemes such
as LEED, EnergyStar, and their international
counter parts,Equity and environmental justice
issues surrounding access to/affordability of
green buildings,Economic issues: Rebound
effects, principal-agent misalignments,
elasticity of demand,Architecture, design and
engineering innovations,Occupant behavior
challenges,Retrofits and energy efficiency
for existing buildings,Distinctions in scales
of actors: Individual, household, building
management, organization,Distinctions in
sectors

Spring 2021
EST 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Dissertation research under direction of
advisor.
1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
EST 700: Dissertation Research Off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G%). Major portion of research will take
place off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.

EST 701: Dissertation Research Off
Campus - International
EST 695: Topics in Technology, Policy, Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
and Innovation
place outside of the United States and/or
Topics selected on the basis of the needs of the
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
graduate program and research interests of the
option of the health plan and may also nroll
staff.
in MEDEX. International students who are
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
in their home country are not covered by
May be repeated for credit.
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
EST 696: Advanced Topics in
be removed. International students who are
Technology, Policy and Innovation
not in their home country are charged for the
Advanced topics selected on the basis of the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
needs of the graduate program and research
covered by another insurance plan they must
interests of the staff.
file a waiver by the second week of classes.
The charge will only be removed if other
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
plan is deemed comparable. All international
May be repeated for credit.
students must receive clearance from an
EST 697: Directed Study
International Advisor. May be repeated for
credit. Offered every semester, 1-9 credits, S/U
Individual studies under the guidance of
Grading
a faculty member.. Subject matter varies
according to the needs of the student.
1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
1-9 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
EST 800: Summer Research
EST 698: Practicum in Teaching
May be repeated for credit.
This course enables graduate students to gain
experience in teaching and interacting with
students enrolled in Technology, Policy, and
Innovation courses. Students enrolled in EST
European Languages,
698 are expected to perform various teaching
duties required by the course instructor, such
Literatures, and Cultures
as attending lectures, providing office hours,
EUR 501: Historical and Cultural
holding review/recitation session, proctoring
Frameworks of Europe
exams, grading, etc...
Intended as a General Introduction to
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-3 credits, S/U
European Civilization and Cultures, this
grading
course begins with the "idea" of Europe and
May be repeated for credit.
traces how it developed over the course of
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

EUR

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

25 centuries. Through the juxtaposition of
historical, philosophical and creative texts, as
well as images, it will cover key points from
ancient Middle-Eastern and Mediterranean
cultures through the Middle Ages and the
Early Modern period, examine various social,
religious, political and artistic configurations
through the XIX and XX centuries, and end
with the creation of the European Union.
Approaches may vary from the philosophical
to the artistic/literary, from the socioeconomic
to the political.
Fall &
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
EUR 502: Methods of Research and
Theories of Interpretation
An introduction to research techniques in
philology and manuscript retrieval, including
an acquaintance with major libraries and
collections throughout Europe and the United
States. This includes basic digital humanities
research techniques. Students will also be
introduced to the major currents of criticism
in literature, history and philosophy, including
the basic concepts of structuralism, Marxism,
reception aesthetics, historiography, and
hermeneutics. Students will be required first to
locate, identify, and describe certain texts, and
then to analyze them according to of the given
theories of interpretation. 3credits. ABCF
grading.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EUR 503: Perceptions and Inventions
of Europe
This seminar will focus on the problematic of
how Europe dealt with the rest of the world,
taken mainly in a historical perspective, and
stressing different aspects of the relation. The
running thread is represented by the triple
topics of contact, conflict, and exchange, using
various types of travelers, such as explorers,
geographers and merchants, as the starting
points, but extending it scholars, artists,
emigrants and exiles. Course will also look at
how non-Europeans first met, described, and
reacted to Europeans. Several media used. 3
credits. ABCF grading.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
EUR 504: European Arts, Poetics,
Culture
The aim of this course is to make an in-depth
critical assessment of the signal contribution
of French, German, Italian and British thinkers
and artists to two major turning points:
Romanticism and Postmodernism, debates
which raged in Europe (and by reflection
95

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
the US), the first from the 1790s through
the 1830s, the second from the post-World
War Two period through the late Nineties.
Among the topics: the nature, ideologies and
structure of the attack on traditional (i.e.:
Enlightenment, and/or Modernist) modes of
thought and organization; the theories and
methods proposed in turn; and implications for
literary theory, education, politics and history;
the evolving features of selected works of art
3 credits. ABCF grading. May be repeated for
credit if syllabus or instructor is different.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
EUR 571: Special Topics In European
Studies
Course will focus on the imaginative
construction of other worlds as a critique of
or alternative to the existing one in specific
moments of Europe's social and cultural
development. Each utopistic project manifests
striking different stylistic, social, symbolic
and philosophical takes on what the different
authors conceive as an alternative to Europe's
complex history. Actual texts may vary
depending on Instructor, and different
mediums may be used.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
EUR 581: Independent Individual
Studies
Studies in specialized topics under the
direction of a designated faculty. Fall, Spring
or

Spring 2021
opportunity for personal and professional
growth, and increased understanding of a
career field from the insider perspective.
Prerequisite: Only matriculated SBU students
may enroll in EXT. Minimum overall GPA
of 3.0 with at least G1 standing and at least
one semester of graduate school completed
at Stony Brook University; acceptance by a
faculty sponsor and permission of the Career
Center
0-3 credits,
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.

FIN
Finance
FIN 523: High-Frequency Finance
This course will give students an overview of
theories and models useful in understanding
and processing automated trading. The
fundamental theories and models of market
microstructure such as the Glosten-Milgrom
model, Roll model and Kyle models are
covered. Then the implementation of
automated trading strategies such as adverse
selection models and detection of informed
trading are introduced. The nature of high
frequency data in various markets is discussed,
and mathematical and statistical techniques
commonly used in modeling such data (such
as ARIMA models, logit regression, Kalman
filter and cointegration) are covered.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

FIN 524: Asset Pricing
This course will give students an overview
of asset pricing theory, estimating asset
pricing models, pricing options and other
derivatives. Topics covered will include
EUR 599: Thesis Research
Consumption-Based Pricing Model and
Research and writing of MA Thesis supervised Discount Factors; Mean-Variance Frontier
by faculty advisor.
and Beta Presentations; Factor Pricing
Fall, Spring, or
Models(Capital Asset pricing Models and
Summer, 3-6 credits, S/U grading
Arbitrage Pricing Theory); ) Speci¿cation
May be repeated for credit.
and testing of linear factor models; HansenJagannathan bounds; Option pricing and
Black-Scholes Formula; Term Structure
of Interests Rate; Numerical methods for
derivative pricing.
Summer, 1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

EXT

Externships

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
EXT 588: Grad Externship
An externship is a form of experiential
learning in which knowledge gained in classes
is applied to an authentic, real-world setting.
With guidance from a faculty sponsor, each
student sets learning goals and works with a
site supervisor to create a mutually beneficial
experience. During the semester, externs
reflect upon their learning experience through
journaling. An externship also provides

FIN 525: Portfolio Management
This course will give students an overview of
the basics of investing, portfolio management,
and risk management, from the perspective
of efficient markets theory. Topics covered
will include the institutions of the modern
financial system and the types of assets
available for investment; models of risk,
the risk-return tradeoff and utility; optimal

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

portfolio choice; the Capital Asset Pricing
Model; multifactor models of return; portfolio
evaluation metrics; basic dynamic portfolio
management strategies; the efficient markets
hypothesis, and possible departures from
market efficiency.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
FIN 536: Financial Management
How managers should interface with
accounting and finance departments and how
firms meet their financial objectives. Financial
tools and techniques, which can be used to
help firms maximize value by improving
decisions relating to capital budgeting, capital
structure, and working capital management are
explained. Related topics include multinational
financial management, risk management, and
mergers and aquisitions.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
FIN 539: Investment Analysis
Modern investment and traditional approaches
to investment valuation, selection and
management. Modern investment theory,
including asset pricing models and efficient
market hypotheses are explained. Traditional
approaches to stock and bond selection,
including fundamental analysis and technical
analysis, will be explained in detail.
Investment management strategies for both
individual and institutional investors will be
developed and discussed.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
FIN 540: Probability and Statistics for
Finance
A survey of probability theory and statistical
techniques with applications to finance
situations. Topics covered include regression;
binomial, Poisson, normal, exponential,
and chi square random variables; tests of
hypotheses; confidence intervals; tests; and
analysis of risk, variance, regression, and
contingency tables. Offered in Fall.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
FIN 541: Bank Management
The goal of the course is to introduce students
to the banking industry, and develop skills
necessary to effectively manage a financial
institution. We will start with an overview
of the banking industry and its regulatory
environment. Then we will learn how to
analyze bank performance, how to measure
and manage various risks associated with
financial intermediation, and how to maximize
bank market value.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

96

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
FIN 545: Capital Markets and Financial
Institutions
Financial institutions and capital markets form
the basis of the financial system in our global
economy. Capital markets are the conduits
in which capital flows through financial
institutions to a network of organized and
over the counter markets. Students will learn
how many of these markets work in tandem to
propel our economy forward. Topics include
money markets, foreign exchange markets,
derivative markets, the banking industry and
the business of banking. The role of money in
the capital markets and a variety of financial
products offered by financial institutions will
be explained.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
FIN 547: Fundamentals of Fixed
Income Analysis
A concrete understanding of the fundamentals
of fixed income security analysis. Study
of the basics of bond analysis, such as the
relationship between the price and yield
of a bond, the sensitivity of a bond's price
to changes in yield, and measuring the
total return on a bond. We will analyze the
determinants of interest rates and how different
market participants interact. Trading strategies,
evaluate their risk, and perform ex-post
analyses will be discussed.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
FIN 549: Risk Management
This course introduces students to risk
management primarily from the perspective
on non-financial corporations. Focus will
be placed on why firms should or should
not manage risk, while demonstrating how
risk management can be used to reduce the
probability that a firm will encounter financial
distress or earnings volatility, and whether
such activities can enhance shareholder value.
The course offers an integrated approach to
risk management by combining concepts,
tools, and techniques which derive from the
financial risk management and insurance
disciplines. The course texts focus on pure
risk, or the use of insurance products to
reduce risk and financial risk management,
including commodity price, exchange rate,
interest rate, and credit risk management.
Financial derivative products will be used
extensively; however, the focus will be more
on the appreciation of derivative products
to hedge risk, rather than the valuation of
derivatives.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
FIN 551: Cases in Finance

Spring 2021
Application of finance concepts to cases
involving financial decisions in a corporate or
institutional setting. Students will be asked to
perform the work of a manager or analyst in
a professional capacity, direct their attention
to specific questions raised and report back
with analysis and recommendations from the
perspectives of the CFO, the Lending Officer,
and other managerial positions. Prerequisite:
MBA 502 and MBA 504
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
FIN 552: Mergers and Acquisitions
The focus of this course is on buying a
controlling stakes in firms. The main topics to
be covered are: Growth through acquisitions,
Critical Steps in the M&A Process, financial
valuation of mergers and friendly acquisitions,
hostile takeovers and buyouts. The course
should be of interest to students interested in
pursuing careers as private equity investors,
advisors in investment banking and corporate
managers.
Prerequisite: MBA 502, MBA 504
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
FIN 562: Data Analysis for Finance
Recent innovation of information technology
along with the fast growth of applications on
the Internet have resulted in an explosion of
financial data, new ways of data collection and
storage, as well as additional opportunities for
business and research based on the data. This
course enables students to analyze financial
data based on traditional financial models.
The major topics include asset pricing, capital
budgeting, risk management, pension fund
management, portfolio analysis, and stock
hedging. Students will learn (review) the
models with a focus on their implementation
using Microsoft Excel, Matlab, or other
programming languages. In addition, the basic
statistical models, such as regression, time
series models and probability models will be
used. ¿Big Data¿ (data mining) technology
will be introduced with a focus on financial
data analysis. The main topics include
classification, clustering, association analysis
and anomaly detection. The key objectives
of this course are: (1) to review the classical
financial models and statistical models; (2)
to teach the concepts of data mining with a
focus on financial applications; (3) to provide
students extensive hands-on experience
in applying the concepts in financial data
applications.

real estate finance, user decision making
and investment from the perspective of
corporate, private, and public owners;
investors; and users. Commercial properties
will be emphasized. The course begins with an
overview of the fundamentals of commercial
real estate and builds on these concepts as we
consider the forces that influence the cyclical,
fragmented, and inherently local business
of real estate. These foundation concepts
are further considered in detail in a series
of four case studies that will be completed
by the students and discussed in class by the
instructor. The course will expose students to
current ¿real world¿ real estate finance, user
decision making and investment situations.
The course is case-based, and students will
be challenged to think on their feet in class.
Students will have the opportunity to develop
their business presentation skills through case
discussions and project presentations.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
FIN 578: Behavioral Finance
Behavioral Finance examines how individuals'
attitudes and behavior affect their financial
decisions. This course reviews recent research
on possible mispricing in financial markets
due to the nature of psychological biases.
Moreover the course deals with behavioral
finance models explaining investor-behavior
or market anomalies when rational models
provide no sufficient explanations. Topics
will include among others overconfidence,
prospect-theory, heuristic-driven biases and
frame dependence.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
FIN 580: Finance Research Practicum
The Finance Research Practicum is a graduatelevel finance capstone course in which
students work in teams on projects proposed
by external sponsors. A goal of this course
is to provide students with an outstanding
opportunity to work with leading industry
practitioners on important business problems,
while helping students bridge the gap between
theory and practice, and introducing them to
the broader financial community. This course
is only for Master of Science Finance students.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

FLA

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Foreign Language Teacher
Preparation

FIN 576: Real Estate Finance
This course is not a lesson on how to get rich
quick in real estate with no money down.
It will be a study of the major aspects of

FLA 505: Methods: Foreign Language
An in-depth exploration of the methods and
materials for the teaching of foreign languages,
literatures, and cultures. Special attention

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

97

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
is given to the theories of first and second
language acquisition and to the techniques
for teaching listening, speaking reading and
writing skills. This course gives students the
opportunity to conduct observations/field
experiences in grade level (7-12) settings.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
FLA 506: Curriculum Development
Drawing on theories of first and second
language acquisition and research into the
best practices of language teaching, this
course trains future language teachers in the
development of well-articulated language
programs (grades 7-12). Students have the
opportunity to enjoy clinical experiences in
school settings. Special attention is given to
the development of a professional teaching
portfolio including lesson plans, assessment
instruments, and technology-based activities.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
FLA 507: Critical Pedagogy
This graduate seminar is intended to introduce
the ideas, theories, and practices that together
constitute the field known as critical pedagogy.
Critical pedagogy assembles numerous forms
of academic approaches to teaching and
curriculum that are informed by critical social
theory. As the educational arm of critical
social theory, critical pedagogy engages
educators in understanding the relationships
among knowledge, ideology, and power. We
will read works from several critical pedagogy
theorists (Freire, Shor, Giroux, McClaren,
Apple, hooks) to explore some of the key
themes within critical pedagogy (relationship
of education to power; issues of difference and
pluralism; transformative education; the social
construction of knowledge; dialogic relations
in the classroom; teaching for social justice).
Learning through collaborative inquiry, we
will translate the theories in these readings
into practice and will test ideas and concepts
unique to teaching and learning "critical
(second/foreign) language" in a school setting.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
FLA 549: Field Experience
Observation, inquiry, and practice in foreign
language education at the secondary level
including 50 hours of documented visitations
and observations at approved sites. Field
experience writing logs are the basis of group
discussion. S/U grading.
1 credit, S/U grading
FLA 550: Field Experience
Observation, inquiry, and practice in foreign
language education at the secondary level
including 50 hours of documented visitations

Spring 2021
and observations at approved sites. Field
experience writing logs are the basis of group
discussion. S/U grading.
1 credit, S/U grading

May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.

FLM
Film

FLA 551: Supervised Student Teaching
7-9
FLM 500: Introduction to Graduate
Studies
FLA 552: Supervised Student Teaching This seminar course will introduce graduate
10-12
film students to each other, to graduate faculty
across disciplines, and will encourage new
FLA 554: Student Teaching Seminar
collaborations and projects for development
during the students¿ graduate careers. Film
Seminar on instructional planning and
students will meet to discuss the role of each
assessment in World Languages, grades
artist, with emphasis on the changing nature
7-12, aligned with current state, national, and
of collaboration and the expanding art form
professional standards. Focus is on delivering
proficiency-based instruction and meeting the in today¿s film profession. Readings, written
needs of diverse learners. Variable credits (1-3 assignments and collaborative projects are
required. 4 credits. Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
credits)
etc.) Prerequisite: Permission of the Instructor.
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Southampton and Manhattan. Semesters
Offered: Fall & Spring.
FLA 570: Introduction to Media for
Language Teaching
Course open to non-D.A. students. Gives
students an introduction to all of the
technology used in teaching languages; audio,
video, computer, and Internet. Emphasis is on
hands-on use and practical applications. Fall or
spring
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
FLA 571: Foreign Language
Technology and Education
Course open to non-D.A. graduate students.
Assumes knowledge of material taught in
DLL/FLA 570. Addresses more globally and
more theoretically the intersection between
technology and languages. Issues of cognitive
learning theory and educational psychology
addressed. Offered as DLL 571 and FLA 571
Prerequisites: FLA 505 and FLA 506
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
FLA 581: Foreign Lang Teach Project
(Ind. Study)
Students enrolled in Track B of the MA
program in European Languages (French,
German, Italian or Russian) or the MA in
Hispanic Languages complete an independent
project in the area of Foreign Language
Teaching. The content and scope of this
project must be approved by the Director of
Foreign Language Pedagogy. Possible projects
include a fully developed professional teaching
portfolio (in print and/or electronic version),
an action research study or a classroom-based
research study culminating in a publishable
paper. Fall or spring
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

3-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
FLM 501: Film Tools
This course will give students an overview of
production essentials; covering safety, basic
movie-making equipment and basic editing.
Student will spend time in the classroom and
on set, shooting various exercises, paying
special attention to set safety, proper handling
of the gear, the ins and outs of a selection
of cameras, sound equipment and lighting.
In addition, the basics of cinematography
and framing, audio techniques and basic set
protocol will be covered. The course will cover
the basics of non-linear editing; including:
creating new projects, media management,
sequence settings, importing, transcoding,
sound, JKL cuts, titling, mixed file format
editing, export settings and delivery.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
FLM 505: Film Management I:
Production Development
Instruction and training in art direction and
design which may include exploration of
a particular approach, review of current
techniques, experiments in style, hands-on
exercrised, intensive production periods, etc.
The particular theme of the course will be
announced in the course schedule. Beneficial
for writers, directors, and producers. Suitable
for film and television.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
FLM 506: Film Management II: Literary
Management
In this course, students will be guided through
a deeper dive examination of best-practices,
98

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
a changing landscape, and strategies for
marketing, distribution, financing, legal
and post-production in film, television, &
digital content. The class is structured as an
independent study for students to workshop
their ongoing individual projects and receive
one-on-one mentoring from class instructors.
Throughout the semester this course will also
include provocative in-class conversations
with working industry professionals such as
producers, agents, lawyers, financiers, and
distributors. This is a highly interactive and
practical application class where students will
work throughout the semester individually and
collaboratively on building an executable plan
for one film, tv, or digital content project of
their choosing in preparation for its creation
and release.

Spring 2021
+, etc.)¿May be repeated for credit. Semesters
Offered: Spring.

FLM 520: Film History II
Course surveys films of a specific period or
movement. May be repeated once. 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)¿

Students read and evaluate the literature on a
topic of special interest under the supervision
of a faculty member. What makes a good
script? What makes a producible script? What
makes a feature film, a television series, a
made-for-tv movie, or a webisode. May be
repeated for credit. Prerequisite: Permission of
instructor. 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B
+, etc.). Semesters Offered: Fall % Spring.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

FLM 523: Film in New York
The course delves into a field survey of
film and television offerings in New York
City, festival by festival and organization by
organization. Students will become acquainted
with the status of film in New York, including,
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
but not limited to The Film Society of Lincoln
May be repeated for credit.
Center, The Tribeca Film Fest, New York
Film Festival, New York Shorts Festival,
FLM 508: Editing I
IFC, Doc NYC, Women¿s International
This course will focus on the editing process
Film Festival, New York Women in Film
and how a film is shaped during editing.
and Television, New York Mayors Office of
Tools of editing will be explored as well as
Film and Television, New York Governor¿s
the theory behind their use. Through film
Office of Film and Television, and New York
examples, articles, books and hands on lessons, Production Alliance. Additionally, all students
students will learn the craft of editing. The
will serve as jurors on the SUNYWide Film
language and purpose behind every cut will be Fest.
examined. Working with cutting-edge digital
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
editing software, the course will cover the
May be repeated for credit.
basics of non-linear editing; including: creating
new projects, media management, sequence
FLM 525: Topics in Film
settings, importing, transcoding, sound, JKL
Intensive studies of selected forms of film
cuts, titling, mixed file format editing, export
and filmmaking from various countries and
settings and delivery.
periods, designed to supplement rather than
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
repeat areas of study already undertaken in the
curriculum. Topics may include producing,
FLM 509: Cinematography I
directing, writings in film, the ins-and-outs of
This course will focus on the fundamentals
financing, genre screenwriting, films without
of camera, sound, safety, and proper use of
words, films in the noir tradition, the spaghetti
basic production equipment. Students will
western, among others. May be repeated for
be introduced to the tools necessary to shoot
credit. Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.
their short films, shooting various exercises in 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.).
a classroom and on the set, including safety,
Semesters Offered: Fall and Spring.
proper handling of the gear, the ins-and-outs of
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
a selection of cameras, sound equipment and
May be repeated for credit.
lighting. In addition we will cover the basics of
cinematography and framing, audio techniques FLM 526: Topics in TV Writing
and basic set protocol. This is the first step to
properly capturing the stories students have to A seminar for writers and filmmakers
concentrating on one area of study or topic
tell. Course takes place in the classroom and
in Television. The particular theme of the
on the set.
course will be announced in the course
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
schedule. Topics may include, among others,
the showrunner, producing the web series,
FLM 510: Film History I
international TV, producing the comedy
Film as text in the context of its time. A study sketch, a survey of American television.
of Film History with attention to specific
1-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
topics in the lexicon, theories, movements and
May be repeated for credit.
genres of the field. It may be repeated as an
independent study with the permission of the
FLM 530: Directed Readings in Film
instructor.¿3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

FLM 536: Forms of TV Writing
Regular submission, discussion, and analysis
of students work in one or more contemporary
areas of television writing. Topics may include
writing for mini-series and limited-series,
unscripted television, writing for documentary,
writing for short form, writing the webisode,
writing for international TV, writing the pilot,
writing the spec, among others.
1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
FLM 537: Production I
In this course, writing, directing, editing and
cinematography training will be synthesized,
focused, and put into practice. Students
work from the scripts developed in previous
semester. In the first weeks, students review
camera, sound, lighting, casting, scheduling,
safety, and running a set, while preparing
shot lists, story boards, call sheets, shooting
schedules, talent agreements and location
releases necessary to bring their visions to
the screen. Then the production cycle begins:
intense breakout sessions coupled with camera
blocking prepare students for the rigors of
a film shoot. To make the experience truly
immersive, students crew on all productions,
so expect to spend many days on set.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
FLM 550: Teaching Practicum
Supervised student teaching of undergraduate
courses accompanied by a seminar in
methods and strategies of teaching film at the
University level. An independent teaching
project, in which the student works with a
particular faculty member, may be substituted.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.).
Southampton and Manhattan. Semesters
Offered: Fall & Spring.
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
FLM 560: Acting Theory and Practice
Course surveys the field of acting-its history,
formal principles, primary techniques, and
contemporary practice. Students develop

99

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
course papers and, or projects in conjunction
with advanced readings and instruction.

Spring 2021
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

FLM 608: Editing II
Horror, comedy, drama and action. Four
different genres, four different editing styles.
This course will cover the styles used to
FLM 575: Adaptation Workshop
edit the various film genres and why each
This course is an intense examination of a
and every cut has a purpose. Focus on the
stage play, a work of fiction (novel, novella,
tools of editing as well as editing theory.
short story, poem) or a work of non-fiction
Through the analysis of film clips, class
(memoir, autobiography, poem), with the
discussion, and hands on lessons, students
object of preparing an adaptation for the
will learn the fundamentals and the processes
screen. Valuable for writers, directors and
of reconstructing these styles. Working
producers. The course will study other text
with editing software, students will have the
to screen adaptations and film versions.
opportunity to edit various scenes, which will
Students will submit an outline or rough draft
of their new version at the end of the course. 3 range in style and tone. Student will learn to
credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.). May be think critically about all aspects of filmmaking,
repeated for credit. Semesters Offered: Fall & including blocking, framing, locations and shot
selection.
Spring.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

FLM 576: Film Workshop
The workshops are intensive classes in
various aspects of the craft of film, including
producing, directing, editing, cinematography,
lighting design, sound design, screenwriting,
directing, acting, scheduling, budgeting,
writing/directing webisodes, writing,
producing and directing within the Dogme
tradition, and episodic television, sitcoms,
dramas, mini-series, and distribution; together
with lectures, readings, seminars, and panels
featuring nationally distinguished artists.
These workshops encourage participation by
visiting students, new theatre and film artists,
established film artists, and teachers who will
be admitted by application and may receive
academic credit upon request. Graduate
students may take any Film Workshop
sponsored by the MFA program for academic
credit. Study may occur in Southampton,
Manhattan, or abroad. A submission of a
workshop application, and permission of
instructor are required. 1-6 Credits. Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) ¿May be repeated for
credit. Semesters Offered:

FLM 609: Cinematography II
This course will introduce you to the advanced
cinema tools at your disposal. We will
spend time in the classroom and on set,
shooting various exercises, utilizing a wide
variety of advanced camera/lighting and grip
equipment. In addition to on-set exercises,
we will study a variety of current and former
cinematographers, analyzing their work from
film to film.

Fall, Spring, 1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
FLM 591: Independent Project
Special project allowing advanced individual
work in an area of film study or practice under
the supervision of a faculty member. Must
be scheduled by arrangement with instructor.
Should result in longer form screenplay,
production package or film, episode, or
webisode. Can include technical, trade, or
business school study.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
FLM 637: Production II
The primary goal of this flexible workshop
is to foster students' individual visions while
expanding the scope of their production
knowledge and experience. Participants
should bring a draft of a 5-12 page script to
the first class. Classes will focus on directors'
preparation- both creative and practical.
For the shoots, students will choose their
collaborators and run their own sets. The final
weeks of the class will be preparation for
Dogme shoots.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
FLM 638: Directing I - Principles of
Directing
This course will focus on the analytical
organizational and creative processes
necessary to be a director. Topics include:
visualizing your story, storyboarding, scene
construction, shooting to the turn in the
scene, shot lists, shoot schedules, framing,
composition, script analysis and interpretation;
visual interpretation (narrative, evocative
image) and working with art directors,
set designers, wardrobe, sound and light

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

designers; casting, and the actor / director
process. Preparation, leadership, scheduling.
Students will gain a practical, hands-on
understanding of the topics covered through
exercises, various directing assignments, and a
final project. 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B
+, etc.).
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
FLM 639: Directing II: Advanced
Directing
This course will build upon the work covered
in Directing I and will focus on advanced
problems in Directing, including advanced
scene work, choreographing the action
scene, directing within a style or period,
directing with f/x, incorporating fx into
scenes, alternative forms, and the challenges
of contemporary film and/or filmmaking.
Topics may change. Prerequisite: THR 638
or permission of instructor. 3 credits. Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.).
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
FLM 640: Film Design Workshop
Advanced assignments in film design. May
include understanding set design, sound
design, light design, art direction, music
supervision, and shooting within a style,
period, genre, era. Prerequisite: Permission of
instructor. 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-B+,
etc.)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
FLM 650: Screenwriting Workshop I
Students write, discuss and receive feedback
on writing exercises, original scenes, and
short or full-length screenplays, teleplays,
episodic television, sit coms, long form
dramas or webisodes. Advanced students may
develop material for production. Prerequisite:
Permission of instructor. 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
FLM 651: Screenwriting Workshop II
Emphasis on a particular aspect or genre of
screenwriting, including comedy, drama, noir,
crime, dogme, period, action, writing within
a high or low budget; character, dialogue,
structure, and experimental forms. Emphasis
also on workshopping whole drafts of longer
form projects. Prerequisite: FLM 650 or
permission of instructor. 3 credits. Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

100

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
FLM 652: Screenwriting Workshop III
Advanced problems in writing of original
screenplays for film, television, web and other
media platforms. Emphasis on whole drafts
and revision.
3-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
FLM 660: Acting Workshop for
Filmmakers
Intensive study in acting in a particular
approach or technique. Rehearsals outside
of the scheduled class time may be required.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. 3
credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.). May be
repeated for credit.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
FLM 669: Advanced Tools
In this hands-on workshop course, students
will focus on five specific areas of film
making...Advanced Cinematography, Line
Producing, Script Supervising, Production
Design and Sound Design. Each class will
be led by a working professional, and at the
conclusion of this course students will emerge
with a greater understanding of each discipline.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring 2021
in the right direction; but is incumbent upon
the student to do the research and secure an
internship. Students then present a written
proposal to the faculty advisor for approval.
Students will also submit an internship
description in the first month of work, then a
journal or evaluation of their work experience.
¿ Prerequisite: Permission of MFA Director. 3
credits. Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
FLM 691: MFA Project
This is a long form produced project. All
proposals for projects must be submitted in
writing to the faculty supervisor and graduate
program director for approval through FLM
692. Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
FLM 692: MFA Thesis Paper
Independent study and research for M.F.A.
students, on special topics related to the MFA
Project, which may result in a screenplay,
webisode, episodic series, documentary
proposal or production package, realized in
FLM 691. Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

FLM 670: Directing Workshop
Advanced training in directing, which
may involve intensive production periods,
experiments in style, exploration of a particular French
technique and approach, such as day for
night, etc. May be repeated once for credit.
FRN 500: Techniques of Reading for
Prerequisite: Permission of Instructor.
Graduate Research
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Through intensive study of language structures
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
and idiomatic usage, with extensive practice
in written translation of literary and scholarly
FLM 680: Art Direction Workshop
texts, candidates for advanced degrees are
Instruction and training in art direction and
able to attain the proficiency level of the
design which may include exploration of
graduate French reading requirement. Several
a particular approach, review of current
departments grant exemption from further
techniques, experiments in style, hands-on
examination for successful completion of this
exercrised, intensive production periods, etc.
course. (Not for graduate students in French.)
The particular theme of the course will be
Fall or Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
announced in the course schedule. Beneficial
A-, B+, etc.)
for writers, directors, and producers. Suitable
for film and television.
FRN 501: Contemporary Culture and
Civilization
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
Analysis of contemporary French civilization
through the study of the development of
FLM 690: Professional Internship
its historical, cultural, political, and social
A full-term internship at a production company characteristics. Designed for potential teachers
or on a production. Students identify a Film
of French at the college level as well as in
company or artist whose work interests them.
secondary schools, this course will emphasize
The student is expected to articulate his/her
and trace the evolution of the character and
goals, research companies and inquire about
institutions of contemporary France and
internship opportunities at those institutions.
French-speaking countries.
A faculty advisor may help point students

FRN

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
FRN 502: French Civilization in Its
Historical Perspective
In this course, students study historical
French civilization concentrating on those
features which have created France today
and its current culture. Political and social
developments are considered as well as major
trends in the arts.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
FRN 507: Stylistics
Stylistic theory and analysis. Contrastive
stylistics French/English. Exploration of the
connotative level of written message. Designed
to develop and refine written expression in
French and analysis of literary and non-literary
texts.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
FRN 510: Phonetics
The pronunciation of French with emphasis
on intonation and articulation. Theory and
practice of linguistic and phonetic factors
of the sound system. Coursework includes
phonetic transcriptions, oral and aural
transcriptions, as well as pronunciation. The
class is entirely conducted in French.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
FRN 511: Business French
A course designed to provide efficiency in
spoken and written business French with an
emphasis on bilingual translation. This course
will also familiarize students with French
business domestically, in the context of the
European Union, and in contrast to America.
Issues of current importance as well as
institutions will be studied. Students will also
carry on individual projects such as comparing
marketing strategies of an American company
in the US and in France or profiling a major
French company.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
FRN 513: Romance Linguistics
This course examines the linguistic evolution
of the Romance languages from the classical
period through modern times. The synchronic
grammars of Italian, French, and Spanish are
examined.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
FRN 531: Studies in 17th-Century
French Literature
101

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Analysis of some of the major literary genres
of 17th-century French literature such as
tragedy, and comedy, novels or poems,
or focus on some of the major themes of
17th-century literature in general. , Mme de
Lafayette, La Rochefoucauld, La Bruyère,
etc.The class is entirely conducted in French.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
FRN 532: Seminar in 17th-Century
French Literature
Special topics in 17th-century French
literature. Intensive reading and analysis of
selected texts by authors such as Descartes,
Pascal, La Fontaine, La Rochefoucauld, La
Bruyere, Mme de Sevigné, and Mme de
Lafayette, among others. Changing topic. The
class is entirely conducted in French.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
FRN 541: Studies in 18th-Century
French Literature
A study of the major texts of the 18th-century
expressing the struggle between absolutism
and the emerging forces of Enlightenment,
preromanticism. It may include the works of
Montesquieu, Voltaire, Diderot, Rousseau,
Beaumarchais, and Laclos, among others, as
well as the works of lesser-known authors who
also helped reshape the literary scene during
that time
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
FRN 542: Seminar in 18th-Century
French Literature
Special topics in 18th-century literature,
such as "Le roman initiatique," and "Eros
in fiction," are studied through the works of
major writers of the period as well as those
of lesser-known figures, in particular women
writers.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
FRN 552: Studies in 19th-Century
French Literature
Close reading of selected works by major
novelists of the period, such as Balzac,
Stendhal, Flaubert, Zola; themes such as Paris
versus the provinces, money and decadence; or
19th-century poetry by Baudelaire, Mallarme,
Verlaine, and Rimbaud, with an introduction
to some important critical approaches to these
texts.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)

Spring 2021
May be repeated for credit.
FRN 561: Seminar in 20th-Century
French Literature
Special attention to a literary trend, a
movement of ideas, or a single author of the
first half of the century. Topics are considered
in parallel with the political and social
contexts, and with other artistic mediums
such as cinema, painting, or photography.
Possible topics: Avant-garde & Surrealism,
Existentialist writers, War Literature, Marcel
Proust, Jacques Prevert, etc.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
FRN 562: Studies in 20th and 21stCentury Literatures
Focused examination of contemporary French
literary texts and recent Francophone writings
of Belgium and Switzerland. Questions may
address the limits of fiction and representation
in the novel, the status of modern theater
and poetry, the new impact of visual and
technological devices, human relationships in a
global world.

FRN 581: Independent Individual
Studies
May be repeated for credit as the topic
changes.
Prerequisite: must be enrolled in a graduate
program.
Fall, 1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
FRN 591: Language Acquisition I
Elementary French I intended for graduate
students from other programs.
1-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
FRN 592: Language Acquisition II
Elementary French II intended for graduate
students from other programs.
1-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
FRN 593: Language Acquisition III
Intermediate and Advanced French intended
for graduate students from other programs.
The requirements for the course will include a
graduate-level component to be determined by
the instructor. May be repeated for credit.

Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

FRN 564: Seminar in Francophone
Literature
Close examination of the literatures written
in French of the Francophone world outside
of France. This course will pose and explore
questions such as: What is Francophone
literature? What is the function of writing in
French in a Francophone context? Attention is
paid to the issue of critical approaches to these
texts. Topics vary from year to year and may
include texts from any of the French-speaking
territories outside of France.

Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

FRN 595: Practicum in Teaching

FRN 599: Thesis Research
Fall and Spring
1-6 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
FRN 800: Summer Research
May be repeated for credit.

FSY
Study Abroad

FRN 570: Special Topics in French
FSY 540: Study Abroad
Literature
May be repeated for credit.
Courses given in the past have covered a single
author, French women writers, French poetry
FSY 582: OVERSEAS: GERMANY
of 1664-1674 and other topics.
May be repeated for credit.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
FSY 588: Overseas: Spain
FRN 571: Free Seminars
Courses given in the past have covered a single May be repeated for credit.
author, genre, and other topics.
FSY 591: OVERSEAS KONSTANZ
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
May be repeated for credit.
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
FSY 592: OVERSEAS TUEBINGEN

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

102

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

GEO 504: Geology of the Turkana
Basin
FSY 594: OVERSEAS: ROME
Students are introduced to the current
perspectives on the origins and evolution
May be repeated for credit.
of the Turkana Basin, Kenya. Students
FSY 595: OVERSEAS: PARIS
learn how to apply fundamental geological
concepts to the sediments and rock units
May be repeated for credit.
to provide a foundation for the chronology
FSY 597: Study Abroad: Japan Kyoto- and context for recorded events in human
evolution. Emphasis is given to sedimentation,
Sangyo
statigraphy, volcanism, and tectonics, as they
May be repeated for credit.
apply to local geology, including training in
field methods. Modern terrestrial processes
and landscape evolution are examined
using features present in the Turkana Basin.
Consideration is also given to broader geologic
Geosciences
events spanning the Oligocene to he present.
Geologic concepts are linked to modern
GEO 500: Geosciences Research
and ancient environments, archaeology, and
Seminar
Meetings in which first-year graduate students paleoanthropology in northern Kenya. It
and undergraduates with senior standing learn is a field-based course involving visits to
about the research activities of the Geosciences important geological and fossil sites. Graded
work includes fieldwork and lab assignments,
faculty.
independent research assignments, quizzes
Fall, S/U grading
and a final exam. Semesters offered-Fall and
Spring. Components- laboratory, lecture, and
GEO 502: GIS for Geologists
recitation.
A practical introduction to geographic
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
information system software. Participants learn
to use direct measurement and mathematical
GEO 505: Experimental Petrology
techniques to compute the location of features Laboratory
and gain practical experience in rendering
imagery and tabular geographic data as layers The course is designed to give the student
on maps. The course consists of two three-hour experience in some or all of the following
techniques of experimental petrology:
sessions per week for the first five weeks of
evacuated silica-glass tube experiments, onesemester, which include fieldwork, lectures,
demonstrations and software-based analysis of atmosphere quenching experiments (with and
without controlled atmospheres), 1- to 5- kbar
data.
hydrothermal systems (using oxygen buffers
This course meets with GEO 588 (Geological
where necessary), gas-media experiments up
Field Methods for Earth Science Teachers) for to 7 kbar, and solid-media, piston-cylinder
the first five weeks of the semester. Students
experiments.
may not take GEO 502 and GEO 588 for
Requirements: Completion of a project
credit.
involving several of the above techniques;
Fall, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
written report
Spring, alternate years, 1 credit, Letter graded
GEO 503: Mineral Equilibria
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
Covers the basics of the application of the
principles of chemical thermodynamics to the GEO 506: Theoretical Petrology
resolution of geochemical and petrological
Theory of phase diagrams, Schreinemaker's
problems. Begins with the first law and
continues through phase transitions, properties rules, heterogeneous equilibria, experimental
of fluids, definitions of fugacity and activity of systems of petrologic interest, and properties
major and trace elements in fluids and molten of solutions.
Prerequisites: Metamorphic and igneous
solutions; configurational entropies; models
quantifying nonideal mixing in solid solutions. petrology and physical chemistry or
thermodynamics; or permission of instructor
Additional topics include interpretation of
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
calorimetric studies and/or solubilities of
etc.)
minerals in aqueous solutions.
May be repeated for credit.

GEO

Prerequisites: Physical chemistry and
thermodynamics, or permission of instructor
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)

GEO 507: Petrogenesis
Discussion of the origin and evolutionary
history of selected types of igneous and

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

metamorphic rocks by integrating the
principles of heterogeneous phase equilibria,
trace-element and isotopic geochemistry,
crystal chemistry, and geologic occurrence.
The laboratory component, GEO 527, must be
taken concurrently; a common grade for both
courses will be assigned. Fall
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
GEO 508: The Rock-Forming Minerals
Study of the crystal chemistry, intracrystalline
cation distribution (homogeneous equilibria)
stability, and paragenesis of the rock-forming
minerals. Special emphasis is placed on
amphiboles, feldspars, micas, and pyroxenes.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
GEO 510: Dimensions of Global
Change
This course is designed to be an intense
study in global climate change science. The
emphasis will be on modern climate change
however, by studying the contributions
of paleoclimatology we can gain insight
into how the climate system operates. To
understand modern climate change and
predictions, it is necessary to develop an
understanding of natural climate forcing,
natural variability and feedbacks in the climate
systems. Adding to natural variation are the
impacts of anthropogenic forcing. The course
will examine the measured and predicted
consequences of these anthropogenic forcing.
Offered Fall and
Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
GEO 511: Computer Programming for
the Geosciences
An introduction to object-oriented
programming in Java for geoscience
students. Participants are required to develop
interactive programs to serve as educational
or research tools pertaining to topics within
the geosciences. These programs, or applets,
include a graphical user interface that enables
users to control parameters and observe results.
The applets are posted on the World Wide
Web.
Prerequisite: Geosciences graduate standing
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
GEO 512: Structure and Properties of
Materials
An introductory course that will explore
materials from the viewpoint of their
structure and chemistry and how these
affect applications. Different states of matter
(crystals, quasicrystals, glasses, liquids)
will be discussed and their similarities and
103

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

differences, focusing on the crystalline state.
Nanomaterials and their peculiarities in
terms of structure and properties will also be
considered. Particular attention will be paid
to (1) Materials for energy and environment
applications, (2) materials for technological
applications, and (3) Earth and planet-forming
materials.

An intensive study of the formation,
deposition, lithification, and diagenesis
of carbonate sediments. Lectures and
seminars emphasize principles of carbonate
deposition, facies relationships, and chemistry.
Laboratories emphasize binocular and
petrographic analysis of recent and ancient
carbonates.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring, alternate years, 4 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

GEO 513: GIS Fundamentals I
This course provides the basic concepts
underlying modern geographic information
science and technology. Emphasis is placed on
the principles of GIS for collecting, storing,
characterizing, and maintaining data and
computer-based techniques for processing and
analyzing spatial data. The course includes
three hours of lecture, in class exercises
and homework projects each week. This is
a computer based class with the majority
of students work involving GIS computer
software. Prerequisite: working knowledge of
spreadsheet software
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
GEO 514: Introduction to Physical
Hydrogeology
Surface hydrology. Principles of groundwater
flow. Well hydraulics. Geology of
groundwater occurrence. Water quality and
groundwater contamination. Hydrologic site
evaluation.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
GEO 515: Geohydrology
Dynamics of fluids in porous media.
Fundamentals of physical hydrogeology.
Quantitative analysis of regional groundwater
system and well hydraulics. Introduction
to numerical simulation techniques.
Hydrodynamic dispersion and basic concepts
of contaminant transport.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
GEO 517: Crystal Chemistry
The structure/property/composition
relationships in solids. An introduction to
the common structure types and how they
illustrate principles useful in understanding
more complex solid-state materials.
Applications of modern scattering techniques
to the study of solids, particularly Earth
materials, are also included.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
GEO 518: Carbonate Sediments

GEO 519: Geochemistry of Natural
Waters
A comprehensive quantitative treatment of the
processes controlling the chemistry of polluted
and unpolluted surface and groundwaters.
Topics covered include thermodynamics
and kinetics of water-rock interaction;
mineral solubility; chemical speciation; redox
reactions; adsorptions; carbonate chemistry;
and speciation, mobility, and toxicity of metal
ions. Based on a knowledge of these processes,
the chemical composition of a wide variety
of surface and groundwaters is interpreted.
Water-quality criteria and their application are
also discussed.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
GEO 520: Glacial Geology
History of glaciation on earth, formation and
dynamics of glaciers and ice sheets; processes
of glacial erosion and deposition; and the
nature of glacial sediments and landforms
particularly relating to the development of
Long Island.
Prerequisite: Physical Geology
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
GEO 521: Isotope and Trace Element
Geology
Application of radiogenic isotopes and trace
elements to the petrogenesis of igneous,
metamorphic, and sedimentary systems
including water-rock interaction in diagenetic
and hydrothermal systems. Evaluation of
radiogenetic techniques for determining the
ages of rocks and minerals.
Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
GEO 522: Planetary Sciences
The chemical, physical, and petrologic
properties of meteorites are reviewed. These
data and data for the moon and the terrestrial
planets are used to form a picture of the origin,
chemical evolution, and accretion of planetary
material.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

GEO 523: Geodatabase and Design
Concepts of geodatabase design and
management in geographic information
systems (GIS), SQL statements, geographic
data types and functions, data entry, and
techniques of geographic information structure
applications.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
GEO 524: Organic Contaminant
Hydrology
There are a host of chemical, biological, and
physical processes that affect the transport
and fate of organic chemicals in natural
waters. This course concerns understanding
these processes and the structure-activity
relationships available for predicting their
rates. The major focus of this class is on
contaminant hydrology of soil and aquifer
environments, and includes the principles
behind remediation and containment
technologies. This course is offered as both
MAR 524 and GEO 524.
Prerequisite: GEO 526 or MAR 503 or
permission of instructor
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
GEO 525: GIS Fundamentals II
GIS Fundamentals II will introduce the applied
use of Geographic Information Systems
(GIS) which is now used extensively in
analytical studies. The course emphasizes
the applications of GIS in solving real-world
problems. Students are expected to gain an
understanding of GIS theory, methodology
and most importantly application. Students are
also expected to demonstrate abilities of spatial
thinking, spatial analysis, and be able to solve
practical spatial problems utilizing a GIS.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
GEO 526: Low-Temperature
Geochemistry
Fundamental principles of chemical
thermodynamics and kinetics, including
isotope effects, as they pertain to geochemical
processes occurring in surface and near-surface
environments. Consideration is also given to
mass transfer process and reaction pathways.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
GEO 527: Petrogenesis Laboratory
Three hours of laboratory per week that
corresponds to the content of GEO 507
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
GEO 528: Carbonate Geochemistry

104

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Examination of the mineralogical and chemical
characteristics of the rock-forming carbonates
with emphasis on stabilities in the geological
environments. Includes study of phase
relations; trace and minor element chemistries;
and mechanisms of growth, dissolution,
and replacement. Use of current research
techniques as applied to carbonate minerals.
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
GEO 530: The Geology of Mars
Overview of Mars as a planetary system.
Evolution of the planet and its atmosphere
through time. Detailed discussion of processes
that have shaped the martian surface, including
erosion, sedimentation, volcanism, impact
cratering, physical and chemical weathering.
Comparison of geologic processes on Mars
and Earth. Discussion of past and future
spacecraft missions to Mars. Three hours of
lecture per week.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
GEO 531: Crystalline Solids
Principles of symmetry, single-crystal, and
powder X-ray diffraction techniques and
elements of crystal structure determination
are considered. Use of crystallographic data
in the study of mineral systems. Laboratory in
diffraction techniques includes extensive use
of digital computers.
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
GEO 532: Solid-State Geochemistry
The application of crystallographic techniques
to problems in mineral chemistry. Concepts
of the crystalline state, order-disorder, atom
radii, chemical bonding, atom coordination,
solid solutions, and physical properties of
minerals. Emphasis on silicate and sulfide
crystal structures.
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
GEO 533: Geochemistry of the
Terrestrial Planets
A brief overview of basic principles of
geochemistry, including origin of the elements,
geochemical and cosmochemical classification
of the elements, and a geochemical perspective
of the periodic table. This is followed by an
examination of the compositions and chemical
interactions among the major geochemical
reservoirs of the terrestrial planets, including
their cores, mantles, crusts, and where
relevant, sedimentary shells.
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring 2021
GEO 535: Regional Structure and
Tectonics
Formation and development of continental
crust in Phanerozoic mountain belts. The
structure and origin of ocean crust, magmatic
arcs, and continental margin sequences are
studied using geophysical, geochemical,
and geologic data from ancient and modern
examples.
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)

GEO 547: Remote Sensing in
Geosciences
Comprehensive study of commonly
used image analysis methods in earth,
environmental and planetary sciences.
Discussion of physical principles that are
the basis for remote sensing techniques.
Participants gain practical experience in
geologic and environmental problem-solving
using satellite imagery.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

GEO 540: Solid Earth Geophysics
An overview of solid earth geophysics.
Topics include earthquake and exploratory
seismology, gravity, magnetics, geochronolgy,
and heat flow. There is an emphasis on how all
of these techniques shed light on the nature of
the Earth's interior and dynamics.

GEO 549: Structural Geology
Principles of structural geology, including
the recognition and the mechanics crustal
structural features. Topics include folding and
faulting, stress and strain, and the nature of
brittle and ductile lineations and foliations
Prerequisite: Physical geology, undergraduate in the crust. Three hours of lecture per week.
The laboratory component, GEO 569, must be
physics and calculus
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) taken concurrently; a common grade for both
courses will be assigned. Spring Prerequisite:
Undergraduate physical geology
GEO 542: Inverse Theory
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Introduction to the basic concepts of inverse
theory and its application to the study of the
GEO 550: Global Tectonics
internal structure of the Earth and related
problems.
Geological, geochemical, and geophysical
evidence related to the concepts of plate
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
tectonics and mantle convection. Kinematics
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
and dynamics of plate motions. Origin of firstorder crustal structures of continents and ocean
GEO 543: Stratigraphy
basins. Geochemical and thermal evolution of
The history and practice of defining units
the Earth.
layered rocks and interpreting their spatial
relationships. Topics include the basis for the
geologic time scale, lithostratigraphic versus
chronostratigraphic units, biostratigraphy,
magnetostratigraphy, facies patterns and
Walther's law, subsurface stratigraphy, and
the application of stratigraphy to geological
problems. The laboratory component, GEO
563, must be taken concurrently; a common
grade for both courses will be assigned. Spring
Prerequisite: GEO 546 or undergraduate
mineralogy and petrology
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
GEO 546: Mineralogy and Petrology
An introduction to mineralogy and petrology,
including crystallography, crystal chemistry,
mineral identification, and the processes
that govern the formation of igneous and
metamorphic rocks. Three hours of lecture
per week. The laboratory component, GEO
566, must be taken concurrently; a common
grade for both courses will be assigned. Spring
Prerequisite: Undergraduate physical geology
and one year of undergraduate chemistry
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
GEO 551: Physics of the Earth I
Study of the internal structure and properties
of the Earth as revealed by field and laboratory
investigations. Topics include the rotation
and figure of the Earth, gravity anomalies,
solid-earth tides, geomagnetism and
paleomagnetism, electromagnetic induction,
and heat flow and the Earth's present and past
thermal states. May be taken independently of
GEO 552.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
GEO 552: Physics of the Earth II
Study of the Earth's structure and properties
based on evidence from seismology and
high-pressure geophysics. Topics include
fundamental principles of elastic wave theory,
body and surface wave propagation in layered
media, earthquake source mechanisms, free
oscillations of the Earth, and rheological
properties of the Earth's interior. May be taken
independently of GEO 551.
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
105

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
GEO 556: Solid-State Geophysics
Application of lattice dynamics and equations
of state of solids to studies in high-pressure,
high-temperature geophysics. Reviews
experimental data from physical acoustics,
static and shock wave compression, and
theoretical results from finite strain and
atomistic models.
Prerequisites: GEO 551 and 552, or
permission of instructor
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
GEO 562: Early Diagenesis of Marine
Sediments
The course treats qualitative and quantitative
aspects of the early diagenesis of sediments.
Topics include diffusion and adsorption
of dissolved species; organic matter
decomposition and storage; and diagenesis of
clay materials, sulfur compounds, and calcium
carbonates. The effects of bioturbation on
sediment diagenesis are also discussed. This
course is offered as both MAR 562 and GEO
562.
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
GEO 563: Stratigraphy Laboratory
Three hours of laboratory per week that
corresponds to the content of GEO 543.
Laboratory work emphasizes practical
techniques in stratigraphy.
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
GEO 566: Mineralogy and Petrology
Laboratory
Three hours of laboratory per week that
corresponds to the content of GEO 546
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
GEO 567: Sedimentary Rocks and
Crustal Evolution
An examination of major and trace elements
and isotopic composition of terrigenous
sedimentary rocks within a framework of
tracing the composition and evolution of
the continental crust. Emphasis is placed on
interpreting sedimentary compositions in
terms of provenance and sedimentary history
(e.g., weathering, diagenesis, recycling).
Relationships between sediment composition
and tectonic setting is also examined.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
GEO 569: Structural Geology
Laboratory
Three hours of laboratory per week that
corresponds to the content of GEO 549

Spring 2021
GEO 570: Earthquake Mechanics
A survey of fundamental mechanics aspects
of earthquake rupture; reviews concepts of
fracture mechanics, elastodynamics, and
experimental rock mechanics. Topics include
state of stress in the lithosphere, theoretical
models of earthquake instability, energetics
of faulting, representation of dynamic elastic
field generated by earthquakes, and relation of
seismic signals to the kinematics and dynamics
of seismic source.
Prerequisite: GEO 552 or permission of
instructor
Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
GEO 571: Mechanics of Geologic
Materials
Elastic, thermal, and anelastic properties of
geological materials. The course emphasizes
a thermodynamic characterization of
these properties including irreversible
thermodynamics and nonhydrostatic
thermodynamics. Specific applications to the
Earth's environment are discussed.
Prerequisites: GEO 551, 552, or permission of
instructor
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
GEO 572: Advanced Seismology
Course is intended to expose the student
to topics that are at the forefront of current
seismological research. Examples include
wave propagation in heterogeneous media,
earthquake source studies, tsunami generation,
and seismic network data analysis.
Prerequisite: GEO 552
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
GEO 573: Physics of Rocks
Fundamentals of the physical properties of
rock in relation to seismology, hydrogeology,
geophysical prospecting and geotechnical
engineering. Topics include: composition,
pore structure and fabric of rocks; elasticity,
anelasticity and plasticity; seismic velocity and
anisotropy; poroelasticity; electrical, magnetic
and hydraulic transpost properties.
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
GEO 581: Coastal Engineering
Geology
Concepts of the mechanics of earth materials
and the physics of surficial processes with
applications to the coastal environment and
engineering. This course is also offered as mar
581.

Prerequisites: Enrollment in MESP or OEN
program or instructor
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
GEO 585: Directed Studies
Special studies directed by various faculty
members.
Fall, Spring, Summer, 1-3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
GEO 587: Hydrogeology Capstone
Project
Students will complete an in-depth capstone
report based on analysis of original,
independent research conducted by the student
on a faculty supervisor-approved topic in
hydrogeology.
S/U grading
GEO 588: Geological Field Methods for
Earth Science Teachers
Geologic mapping techniques, geochemical
analytical approach, and hydrological
methodologies applied in the field to examples
on Long Island. These approaches are designed
for developing research projects for secondary
students in earth science.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
GEO 589: Research for Earth Science
Teachers
This course is intended to provide earth
science teachers or students in the M.A.T.
in Earth Science program an opportunity to
obtain research experience. A written report is
required.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Summer, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
GEO 590: Research Project
Independent research
Fall,Spring,
Summer, 1-12 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B
+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
GEO 599: Research
Independent research for those students
established in a research group.
1-12 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
GEO 600: Practicum in Teaching
Fall and Spring, 0-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
GEO 603: Topics in Petrology

1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

106

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
GEO 604: Topics in Planetary Science
May be repeated for credit.
GEO 605: Topics in Sedimentary
Geology-Paleontology
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
GEO 607: Topics in Geophysics
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Spring 2021
May be repeated for credit.
GEO 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

GEO 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
GEO 609: Topics in Mineralogy and
(G5). Major portion of research will take
Crystallography
place outside of the United States and/or
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
A-, B+, etc.)
option of the health plan and may also enroll
May be repeated for credit.
in MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by
GEO 696: Geoscience Colloquium
mandatory health plan and must contact the
A weekly series of research seminars presented Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
by visiting scientists as well as by the faculty. be removed. International students who are
Required every semester of all geoscience
not in their home country are charged for the
graduate students.
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
Fall and Spring, S/U grading
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
May be repeated for credit.
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.
GEO 697: Geoscience Seminar
Presentation of preliminary research results
All international students must received
and current research problems by students
clearance from an International Advisor.
and faculty. Required every semester of all
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
geoscience graduate students.
May be repeated for credit.
Fall and Spring, S/U grading
GEO 800: SUMMER RESEARCH
May be repeated for credit.
May be repeated for credit.
GEO 698: Geoscience Special Seminar
A weekly series of specialized seminars in
which graduate students and faculty discuss
specific topics within the subgroups of
geology. Research is reviewed, and theses are Germanic Languages and
Literature
discussed.

GER

Fall and Spring, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
GEO 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Independent research for Ph.D. degree. Open
only to candidates for the Ph.D. who have
passed the preliminary examination.
Prerequisite: Advancement to candidacy (G5).
Major portion of research must take place on
SBU campus, at Cold Spring Harbor, or at the
Brookhaven National Lab.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U
grading

GER 500: Intensive Reading German
This course is designed for graduate students
in other programs to understand German prose.
Students learn the basic structures of German
grammar, acquire general and specialized
vocabulary, and translate a variety of texts,
including some from their academic areas
of interest. In certain programs, successful
completion of this course satisfies a language
requirement, while in others it serves as
preparation for their own foreign-language
exam or testing procedure.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
GER 506: Advanced Stylistics
Advanced stylistics and discourse analysis.
Designed to deepen the advanced student's
knowledge of the syntax, structure, and
stylistic versatility of the German language.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
GER 539: Contrastive Structures:
German-English
Contrastive study of the phonological,
morphological, syntactic, and semantic
structures of German and English.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
GER 541: Literature of the Goethe
Period
A study of the literature and culture of
Germany during Goethe's lifetime, 1749-1832.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
GER 544: German Fiction
Major authors of modern German fiction
are read and discussed. Texts many include
works from 19th and 20th century authors. The
course may also focus on works by a single
author.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
GER 545: 20th-Century German Poetry
Intensive reading and discussion of 20thcentury German poetry, including works by
Rilke, Trakl, Brecht, Benn, and Kirsch. The
course may also focus on a single poet or
movement in the 20th century.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
GER 546: 20th-Century German Drama
A survey of representative plays of the 20th
century, including works by Hauptmann,
Hofmannsthal, Kaiser, Sternheim, Toller,
Fleisser, Horvath, and Brecht. The course may
also focus on the works of a single dramatist.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
GER 547: Special Author Studies
Tutorial
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
GER 548: Special Period Studies
Tutorial
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
107

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
May be repeated for credit.
GER 557: History of the German
Language
Proceeding from several characteristics of
language in general and from the position of
German within the Indo-European language
family, this course addresses: the periodization
of German language history; internal
developments from Indo-European to modern
German; the most important cultural events on
the path of German from the tribal dialects to
a unified language; and relations of borrowing
between German and other languages. Texts
from the different periods are examined for
their linguistic features as well as for content.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
GER 558: Middle High German
An introduction to Middle High German
grammar with representative reading from the
Middle High German classics.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
GER 562: Historical Germanic
Linguistics
An introduction to the principles and methods
of historical linguistics as applied to problems
in the Germanic branch of Indo-European
(early tribal movements, attempts at dialect
grouping, dialect geography, etc.). Part of
the course will be devoted to readings in
Gothic, Old Norse, and Old High German with
a comparison of the morphologies of these
languages.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
GER 581: Independent Study
May be repeated for credit.
GER 591: Language Acquisition I
Elementary German I intended for graduate
students from other programs.
1-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
GER 592: Language Acquisition II
Elementary German II intended for graduate
students from other programs.
1-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
GER 593: Language Acquisition III
Intermediate and Advanced German intended
for graduate students from other programs.
The requirements for the course will include a
graduate-level component to be determined by
the instructor. May be repeated for credit.
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
GER 595: Practicum in Teaching

Spring 2021
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
GER 599: Thesis Research
GER 599 Thesis Research. One-six credits. S/
U grading. May be repeated for credit.
1-6 credits,
May be repeated 6 times FOR credit.
GER 601: Special Author
Tutorial to be arranged with appropriate staff
member.
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
GER 602: Special Period
Tutorial to be arranged with appropriate staff
member.
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
GER 800: Summer Research

GRD
The Graduate School
GRD 500: Responsible Conduct of
Research and Scholarship
This course is designed to introduce students
to the major issues in the ethics of research
and scholarship. Using a combination of
readings - written and web-based - videos,
lectures, case discussion and other exercises,
students will investigate the moral values
intrinsic to research/scholarship/creative
activity in their discipline and the professional
and social values with which members of
the discipline must comply. Each class will
begin with an introductory lecture or video
followed by discipline-based, small group
discussions with the participation of faculty
from the department or program from which
the graduate students come.
0-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
GRD 510: Career Planning for
Graduate Students
GRD 510 engages students in the PhD Career
Ladder Program, which leads graduate
students through the essential components of
career development following the general steps
of an Individual Development Plan (IDP).
The steps include: self-assessment, career
research, skill identification and building,
informational interviewing, CV/resume
crafting, networking, and goal setting. Each

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

section¿s discussion are led by a graduate
student leader. Students will cultivate the
career readiness competencies employers
expect and gain a career development
framework that they can apply to any career
goal, academic and non-academic, now and in
the future. By the end of the course, students
will have gained enhanced knowledge of their
skills, values and interests and how these
apply to a career of interest, a customized CV
or resume for a job of interest, a broadened
professional network, and finally, an IDP
outlining goals for their next steps.
0-1 credits, S/U grading
GRD 520: Introduction to Science
Policy for STEM
Science, technology and innovation (STI)
are ubiquitous part of life and we must
understand these concepts in order to develop
effective policies. This 1 credit hour course
is designed to teach engineering and science
graduated students the main concepts in
science, technology and innovation policy.
0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
GRD 550: CEAS Placeholder
Placeholder course for students in special
programs in CEAS. Specific programs
designated by course topic.
0-12 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

GSS
Geospatial Science
GSS 509: Digital Cartography
Maps portray spatial relationships among
selected phenomena of interest and
increasingly are used for analysis and
synthesis. Cartography is the knowledge
associated with the art, science, and
technology of maps. Digital computer
cartography still follows the same fundamental
principles and still requires a broad
understanding of graphicacy as a language (as
well as numeracy and literacy). This course
will provide an introduction to cartographic
principles, concepts, software and hardware
necessary to produce good maps, especially
in the context (and limitations) of geographic
information systems (GIS).
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
GSS 513: GIS Fundamentals I
This course provides the basic concepts
underlying modern geographic information
science and technology. Emphasis is placed on
108

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
the principles of GIS for collecting, storing,
characterizing, and maintaining data and
computer-based techniques for processing and
analyzing spatial data. The course includes
three hours of lecture, in class exercises
and homework projects each week. This is
a computer based class with the majority
of students work involving GIS computer
software. Prerequisite: working knowledge of
spreadsheet software

Spring 2021
identify implementation issues for a GIS
project or program; be prepared to assist in
decision making procedures that involve
management; incorporate strategies for success
in your workplace; understand some of the
legal issues about the use of GIS data; and
be aware of the GIS industry outlook for
employment and education.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.

GSS 550: Applied Spatial Analysis
The specific focus is on spatial data analysis,
GSS 517: Geospatial Narratives: Deep such as the analysis of autocorrelation,
Mapping for Humanities and Social
principles of geostatistics and analysis
Sciences
methods that are relevant in the fields of
Building on formal methods in qualitative
public health, environmental/earth science
reasoning, spatial and temporal representation and social science. An important aspect of
and geospatial science, this course will explore the course is to gain hands-on experience
state-of-the-art methods for humanities and
in applying these techniques with GIS and
social sciences students to visualize and
spatial analytical software, and essential
drill down data. Hands-on exercises of deep
methodological and practical issues that are
mapping will cover how to collect, analyze
involved in sophisticated spatial analyses. 3
and visualize quantitative and qualitative
credits.
data, spatial data, images, video, audio, and
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
other representations of places and artifacts in
humanities and social sciences. This course
GSS 554: Geospatial Science for the
will also discuss models of reasoning about
Coastal Zone
events, actions and changes that are spatially
The use of spatial date is becoming
contextualized. Only GSS517 or GSS513/
increasingly critical in the decision
GEO513 will count the Graduate Certificate.
management process and planning of the
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
coastal zone. This course will use GIS and
Remote sensing tools to collect and analyze
GSS 523: Geodatabase and Design
data for intergrating into the management,
Concepts of geodatabase design and
planning, and monitoring of the coastal
management in geographic information
geomorphology and ecosystems. Offered in
systems (GIS), SQL statements, geographic
Fall.
data types and functions, data entry, and
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
techniques of geographic information structure
applications.
GSS 555: GIS and Remote Sensing
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
This course provides a basic overview of the
May be repeated for credit.
technology by which aircraft and satellite
data are produced and utilized in analyses
GSS 525: GIS Fundamentals II
to answer questions within a geographic
GIS Fundamentals II will introduce the applied context. Students will learn to identify sources
use of Geographic Information Systems
of remotely sensed imagery appropriate for
(GIS) which is now used extensively in
common applications; acquire, manipulate,
analytical studies. The course emphasizes
and interpret aerial photographs and satellite
the applications of GIS in solving real-world
imagery/data; and incorporate remote sensing
problems. Students are expected to gain an
data into Geographic Information Systems.
understanding of GIS theory, methodology
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
and most importantly application. Students are May be repeated for credit.
also expected to demonstrate abilities of spatial
thinking, spatial analysis, and be able to solve GSS 570: Geospatial Narratives: Deep
practical spatial problems utilizing a GIS.
Mapping for Humanities and Sciences
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Course will present special interest topics or
May be repeated for credit.
recent software enhancements in the rapidly
developing field of Geospatial Science.
GSS 526: GIS Project Management
The course will include a mixture of core
This course will enable students to addresses
geospatial techniques and recently released
issues unique to a GIS operation such as:
methodology. Course will include a diversity
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

of Geospatial topics including discipline
specific topics relevant to majors in physical
sciences, social sciences, business and
engineering.
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
GSS 575: Geospatial Teaching
Practicum
The teaching practicum provides teaching
experience, carried out under faculty
supervision. Student will work with a faculty
member as assistant in a regularly scheduled
course and student will be assigned a specific
role to assist in teaching the course. The
student will meet with the instructor on
a regular basis to discuss intellectual and
pedagogical matters relating to the course.
0-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated 3 times FOR credit.
GSS 587: Geospatial Research
This course is intended to provide graduate
students in the Geospatial Science program
an opportunity to obtain research experience.
A written report is required. Prerequisite:
Permission of instructor 1-3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
GSS 588: GIS Internship
The GIS Internship is designed to provide
students experience in the real workplace.
Interns are expected to function as a GIS
professional and work within the existing host
facility structure or on a free standing project.
Interns will complete assigned tasks by hosting
facility such as GIS data entry, data retrieval,
GPS field work, documentation, or general
GIS facility duties. These activities will be
monitored by both a representative of the host
facility and the instructor.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

HAX
Health and Rehabilitation
Sciences
HAX 600: Doctoral Seminar
Provides a venue for faculty and doctoral
students to discuss all aspects of their
research. Researchers will present different
branches of translational science and discuss
linkage between research agendas. Provides
opportunity for data to be viewed and analyzed
by investigators with different perspectives and
tools for analysis. Offered in the
109

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Fall, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
HAX 602: Frameworks, Models and
Classification Systems in Health and
Rehabilitation Sciences
Examines the dynamic interaction between
health, disability, and community and
contextual factors as identified using different
frameworks and models. These frameworks
and models will be expounded to recognize
the influence of each solely and collectively
in terms of health and rehabilitation research,
disability studies, and behavioral and
community health research. Explores parallels
and divergences in approaches with particular
attention to analyzing how students in varied
concentrations can work together to engage in
meaningful translational research within the
domains of historical and present-day society
and research paradigms.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HAX 605: Research Ethics
Presents a broad overview of research ethics
and regulation. Conveys the moral bases
of scientific ethics, the historical evolution
of social science and biomedical research
ethics, and the development, implementation
and limitations of U.S. human subjects
regulations. Includes ethics and morality
in science; science in society; scientific
integrity; misconduct; whistle blowing;
conflicts of interest; collegiality; publication
and authorship; peer review; history and
development of human experimentation
ethics and regulations (HHS, FDA);
Institutional Review Boards; informed consent,
waivers, vulnerable populations; privacy and
confidentiality of records; epidemiology; and
research using animal subjects.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HAX 620: Rehabilitation and Disability
Introduces the Science of Rehabilitation and
the Science of Disability. Presents models
of rehabilitation and disability research and
discusses controversies and commonalities
between these areas. Forms the groundwork
of future coursework in rehabilitation and
movement sciences.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HAX 626: Outcome Measurement in
Rehabilitation Research
Introduces outcome measures relating to
impairments, functional limitations and
disability, general health status, and patient/
client satisfaction. These outcome measures
are used to guide research outcomes. Explores
measurement properties and discusses
strategies to appropriately assess and select

Spring 2021
various outcome measurement scales. Critical
appraisal of the literature will provide the basis
for making research methodological decisions
regarding selection of the most effective
outcome measures.

selected modalities such as E-stim, FES, TMS,
EEG, EMG, NCV, and H-reflex.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

HAX 632: Teaching and Learning
This course will introduce students to adult
learning principles and strategies for effective
teaching of cognitive psychomotor and
affective skills and behaviors in academia.
Individual teaching/learning philosophical
orientations, characteristics of the adult
learner, learning styles, self-directed learning,
and reflective practice will be explored.

HAX 629: Evidence Based Pediatric
Rehabilitation Research
Provides students an opportunity to develop
an overview of issues related to the health
of America's children and adolescents.
Emphasizes chronic disease and disability,
nutrition, fitness, educational accommodations,
and trends in long term health services and
health policy. Explores the growing need
for evidence based practice and outcomes
assessment necessary for the development
of strategies for optimal function of children
with disease/disability and their families.
Students will review and analyze evidence
for interventions for a specific pathology/
disability.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
HAX 630: Exercise Physiology and
Physical Activity
Provides key elements of exercise physiology
and instructs students in measurement
techniques for the assessment of exercise
capacity and physical activity. Reviews normal
physiology of the cardiopulmonary system
and presents normal immediate response to
exercise, and long-term effects of exercise in
the healthy individual. Explores foodstuffs for
energy production, metabolic pathways for
production of ATP, and energy systems used
in aerobic and anaerobic activities. Principles
of physical activity assessment and body
composition and examines qualitative and
quantitative measurement techniques across
the lifespan and in disability. Assimilates,
via lab manual, literature reviews of articles
addressing measurement.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
HAX 631: Electro/Neurophysiology:
Topics for Rehabilitation Research
Introduces basic methodology of clinical
electrodiagnostic measures of EEG, EMG,
nerve conduction velocity studies (NCV), Hreflex and evoked potentials. Interpretation
of these measures provides access to the
physiological basis of disability in peripheral
or central nerve damage and potentials for
recovery. Examines the interventions using
peripheral and central electrical stimulation
modalities on muscle, bone, cardiovascular and
autonomic systems. Includes lab activities of

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
HAX 634: Motor Learning and Motor
Control
This course will introduce the various theories
underlying human motor control. Students
will actively synthesize and analyze current
theory and research related to motor control
and skill acquisition through examination of
relevant literature. This course places emphasis
on determining the implications of this work
for future research, educational and/or clinical
practice. Includes early and contemporary
theory, skill acquisition facilitation, practice,
feedback, transfer of training, modeling, part
vs whole training, imagery, implicit learning,
explicit learning and memory systems.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
HAX 635: Biomechanics and
Movement I
Introduces students to principles and
interrelationships of biomechanics and
movement. Includes physical biomechanics
of the extremities as a foundation from
which to apply biomechanical principles.
Involves learning to use mathematical
approaches to solving static problems and
lay the groundwork for solving dynamic
biomechanical problems. Reinforces
biomechanical theoretical concepts and
mathematical models with lab experiments
that involve the manipulation of 3D kinematic,
kinetic and EMG data
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
HAX 636: Biomechanics of the
Musculoskeletal System and Movement
II
Provides advanced concepts of kinetics in the
field of biomechanics. Explores biomechanical
concepts during lecture and reinforces those
applications with associated lab experiments.
Provides viscoelastic characteristics of
110

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
biological tissues as a foundation applied to
human motion. Includes mathematical models
of the musculoskeletal system and analysis
of the dynamics of human motion. Collection
and analysis of gait and other movement
kinematics, kinetics and muscle activation by
electromyography (EMG) are components of
lab activities.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
HAX 637: Orthopedic and Anatomical
Principles I
Provides advanced concepts of orthopedics
and anatomy. Focuses on best evidence of
examination, evaluation, diagnosis, prognosis,
and procedures used for a variety of orthopedic
conditions of the spine and pelvis. Requires
active engagement in problem solving by
identifying research problems, searching for
evidence, and evaluating and synthesizing
the evidence to answer research questions.
Includes examination of select advanced
procedures and principles to enhance research
investigations.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
HAX 638: Orthopedic and Anatomical
Principles II
Continues and expands on advanced concepts
of orthopedic interventional research. Focuses
on best evidence of examination, evaluation,
diagnosis, prognosis, and intervention of
orthopedic conditions of the extremities.
Requires active engagement in problem
solving by identifying research problems,
searching for evidence, and evaluating and
synthesizing the evidence to answer research
questions. Student directed pilot study will
incorporate knowledge of select advanced
techniques and technologies.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
HAX 639: Technology and Medical
Imaging in Rehabilitation
Examines a range of medical imaging
techniques available for use and interpretation
in rehabilitation research. Includes
radiographs, fluoroscopy, MRI, fMRI,CT,
qCT, MEG, TMS and diagnostic US.
Synthesizes the technologies and their
limitations, the methods of capture and
interpretation. Reviews evidence supporting or
refuting the sensitivity of these techniques in
determining outcomes in rehabilitation.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Spring 2021
HAX 640: Community Health and
Community Based Participatory
Research
Provides an overview of critical issues in
conducting research in community settings
including models of community-based
services. Covers the general principles of
community-based participatory research, and
practical and ethical issues in collaborating
with communities, quantitative and qualitative
techniques used in community-based
participatory research, evaluations, and
interventions. Prerequisite: 24 credits of
HAXPH core courses or Permission of
Instructor¿
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HAX 641: Community Mental Health
Explores the policies and programs that
address mental health needs of individuals
with a community health focus. Students will
apply models of behavior and health to explore
topics of mental health including stigma,
marginalization, self-determination. Discusses
challenges to service provision. Focuses on
the ethics of research with this population as a
central theme.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HAX 642: Participation and Health in
Pediatric and Educational Settings
Explores policies and programs that inform
pediatric services and community based
research. Focuses on pediatric programs that
influence health and community participation.
Includes programs that support health,
wellness, and community participation as
well as those influenced by the Individuals
with Disabilities Education Improvement Act
(IDEA) that supports children with disabilities
from Birth to 21 years. Prerequisites: 24
credits of HAX core courses or permission of
Instructor.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HAX 643: Healthcare Systems and
Policy Analysis
Provides students with an overview of the US
healthcare system and major health policy
challenges we face. Explores the history
and state of the US healthcare system, and
circumstances that have given rise to current
problems such as employer-based health
insurance, challenges in access to and quality
of care, and the rising costs associated with
the US healthcare model. Discusses ways
to improve upon the system, importantly
including the Affordable Care Act, and
how this legislation was enacted with close
attention paid to the policymaking process,

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

roles of political actors, and the importance of
policy analysis.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
HAX 644: Ethics, Health Disparities
and Social Justice
Examines aspects of inequality and health
status as an injustice within the context
of ethical theories (utilitarian, libertarian,
deontological, equalitarian). Determines the
influence on case studies of health disparities
and inequalities. Discusses cases such as
global and U.S. racial, class and gender
disparities and in developing countries.
Presents ethical issues relative to different
methods of measuring health inequalities and
related policies.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
HAX 645: Organizational Theory,
Management and Leadership
Examines theoretical and conceptual
framework for understanding leadership and
management styles of health and human
services organizations and how they operate
in a broader community. Identifies and applies
strategic models to analyze organizational
problems, organizational behaviors and
processes, formulate strategic solutions, and
make sound decisions. This knowledge is
critical for the behavioral and community
health field to understand how individuals
influence and are influenced by organizations.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
HAX 646: Social Behavior and
Community Health Change
Examines the nature of the behavior that
takes place within social systems and how to
effectuate change in these systems. Analysis
of behavior and possibilities for change will
be placed in the context of health and public
health questions and will draw upon theories
of organizational behavior, leadership, and
mechanisms for action.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
HAX 647: Policies and Ethics in
Behavioral and Community Health
Explores health care policies of the US health
care system and the influence on public health
and programs in behavior and community
health. Includes access and utilization of health
care, barriers to care, prevention programs,
and health disparities and ethics. Addresses the
perspectives of the consumer, provider and the
institution.
111

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

HAX 668: Emerging Topics in Disability
Studies
HAX 653: Research Methods: Design
Focues on the intersections of disability with
and Statistics
other emerging area studies such as gender,
This course presents process and skills
class, sexuality, race and global studies.
needed to develop independent research
Encompass study of different emerging
studies, including but not limited to,
disciplinary areas of disability studies in the
formulating a research question or hypothesis,
social sciences, health sciences, humanities,
conducting literature searches, critically
business, and technology. Explores the
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
appraising scientific literature, and selecting
connections between disability activism, art,
appropriate research designs and methods.
HAX 665: Disability, Participation and
and scholarship in the 21 century. Traces
This information will be presented in the
Justice
emerging regional distinctions in disability
context of protecting human subjects and
studies research and scholarship, especially
Explores concepts of "Participation" and
health information based on the policies and
"Justice" as they relate to disability experience. between Northern and Southern Countries
procedures of the Committee on Research
Introduces research strategies, participatory
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Involving Human Subjects (CORIHS) and
methods and methodologies for disability
May be repeated for credit.
IACUC.
studies research in the applied social and
health sciences. Discusses ethical issues
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HAX 669: Disability and Health in Local
in disability research and what it means to
May be repeated for credit.
and Global Contexts
disabled people in daily life. Examines social
Critically examines the experiences of
HAX 656: Qualitative Research
analysis, healthcare discourse, and research on people with disabilities in a local and global
the evolution of healthcare practices, cultural
Students will learn the basic principles
context and examines the connections
beliefs, and social structures influencing
and techniques of effective analysis and
between the two contexts. Utilizes policy
interpretation of the merits of qualitative data. the treatments, services, and opportunities
documents, ethnographies, memoirs, program
available to disabled people in the United
Examines how qualitative research captures
evaluations, and multi-media and provides
complex phenomena that span the international States and internationally.
the tools to critically evaluate local and global
classification of function (ICF) and impact
disability experiences as well as programs and
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
on quality of life, illness/injury experience
interventions.
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
and recovery. Students will learn the strengths
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
and limitations of qualitative analysis and
HAX 667: Disability Studies Language,
how it complements quantitative analysis.
Narrative and Rhetoric
HAX 690: Independent Study in Health
Emphasizes several methods to represent
Focuses on how language and rhetoric frame
and Rehabilitation Sciences
data, such as the mixed method approach,
how disability is perceived, experienced,
Independent study proposals in health
and students will apply a range of analysis
and treated. Included critical and rhetorical
and rehabilitation sciences. Approval of
techniques through research exercises.
analysis of professional discourses as
independent study proposal and credit hours
well as personal disability narratives and
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
required prior to registration.
memoirs. The society for Disability Studies,
May be repeated for credit.
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
an interdisciplinary organization, says in its
May be repeated for credit.
HAX 663: Disability, Occupation and
mission statement, disability is a key aspect
Community
of human experience.So is language. This
HAX 693: Directed Readings
Inspired by disability justice social movements course explores the interdisciplinary nature of
Provides faculty directed readings and guided
disability studies and the roles language and
in the US and abroad, this course presents
discussion to synthesize selected content
rhetoric play in representations of disability.
politically engaged critical approaches
related to the current course curriculum
Some questions to be explored include:
to disability that intersect community
and/or to the students' research interests.
In what ways do clinical or professional
organizations, the arts and academic fields
Through the guided readings, the students
discourses and personal narratives reveal
including occupational therapy, disability
will learn foundational and advanced
experience of power and powerlessness?
studies and anthropology. Broader than a
theoretical constructs that will be important
medical category, disability identity recognizes How is the bodily experience of disability
underpinnings of their future studies and
described in professional contexts as compared
the political and economic dimensions of
doctoral research. Specifically, studies
to
personal
narratives?
How
does
description
disability inequity as it related to other forms
may focus in the concentration areas of
and perception influence the practice of
of inequality and disadvantage. Themes
rehabilitation and movement science, disability
professionals and quality of life for people
include all permutations of the concept of
studies or behavioral and community health.
with disabilities? What assumptions about
occupy;disability justice/decolonization;
A critical analysis of readings may include
disability are revealed through rhetorical
[participation and training for collaborations;
theoretical constructs, methodologies, and/
analysis? These questions will frame our
marginalization and minoritization;
or interpretation of results. The course will
attention to representations of disability in
technology; struggle, creativity, and change.
include analytical writings and a summative
a variety of texts: academic, professional,
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
paper.
literary, clinical, personal, and visual. Not to
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
be taken for credit with ESL 592
HAX 664: Conceptual Foundations of
May be repeated for credit.
Disability Studies 1890s-1990s
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Present conceptual foundations of disability
studies beginning with the 19th and early 20th
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

century theories and scholarships. Theorists
from the 1960s and 1970s who influenced the
theoretical development of the new field of
disability studies will be discussed. The course
will explore foundational disability studies
scholarship of the 1980s and 1990s as the field
established itself first in the social sciences and
then the humanities.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

112

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
HAX 699: Dissertation Research On
Campus
Dissertation research under direction of
advisor. Prerequisite: Advancement to
candidacy (G5). Major portion of research
must take place on SBU campus.
1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
HAX 700: Dissertation Research Off
Campus- Domestic
Dissertation research under direction of
an advisor. Prerequisite: Advancement to
candidacy (G5). Major portion of research
will take place off-campus, but in the United
States and/or U.S. provinces. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
HAX 701: Dissertation Research Off
Campus International
Dissertation research under direction of an
advisor. Prerequisite: Must be advanced to
candidacy (G5). Major portion of research will
take place outside of the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Domestic students have
the option of the health plan and may also
enroll in MEDEX. International students who
are in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver by the second week of classes.
The charge will only be removed if other
plan is deemed comparable. All international
students must receive clearance from an
International Advisor.
1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
HAX 800: Summer Research
Prerequisite: Pre-approved participation
in health rehabilitation sciences (HAX)
department activity. S/U Grading. May be
repeated for credit.
May be repeated for credit.

HBA
Anatomical Sciences
HBA 521: Gross Anatomy of Head,
Neck, and Trunk

Spring 2021
Tutorial laboratories with emphasis on
dissections of the human head, neck, and
trunk.

Regional approach to the gross anatomy of
the lower limb for physical therapy graduate
students (DPT). The course is presented in
conjunction with HYA519, Kinesiology for
8 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Physical Therapists. This module will offer
an exopanded view of the functional anatomy
HBA 531: Nervous System
and arthrology of the hip, thigh, leg and foot.
This course provides an integrative overview
of the structure and function of the mammalian Labs will be three hours, one day per week.
Enrollment will be limited to DPT students.
nervous system with an emphasis on the
S/U grading
human brain, the cranial nerves and the
neurobiology relevant to the oral cavity.
HBA 550: Vertebrate Evolution
It begins with a series of lectures centered
on cellular foundations, basic principles of
Survey of the fossil record of vertebrate
cell signaling/neurophysiology and nervous
evolution. The course emphasizes the origin,
system development. The major structures
phylogeny, comparative and functional
of the central and peripheral nervous system
morphology, biogeography, and paleontology
and their functions are also introduced.
of vertebrate animals. Laboratory included.
These sessions build foundations for more
The lectures and laboratories will utilize an
in-depth investigations at systems levels;
extensive collection of comparative anatomical
sensory, motor, higher order, homeostatic
material, fossil casts, and slides.
and cranial systems are emphasized. For
Prerequisite: Previous course in human
most topics, basic principles are reinforced
or vertebrate anatomy and permission of
using clinical examples from different dental
instructor.
disciplines and the interactive lectures are
Spring, alternate years, 4 credits, Letter
complemented and extended in student
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
working group sessions that use the primary
literature, case-based problem solving and
HBA 551: Phylogenetic Systematics,
other forms of active learning to solidify
Biogeography and Comparative
learning and make clinical connections. This
Methods
course represents a coordinated teaching effort This course will provide students with a
from the Departments of Neurobiology and
familiarity in the practical application of
Behavior, and Anesthesiology.
modern phylogenetic methods and the use
8 credits, S/F graded
of phylogenies in framing evolutionary
hypotheses. The course will have both a
HBA 540: Human Anatomy for Physical lecture and laboratory component with lectures
Therapists
including in-class discussions of assigned
A lecture and laboratory course that includes
readings. Lab exercises will be devoted to
dissections of the entire human body. The
hands-on experience with available software
course is organized in three modules: (1)
for phylogenetic and comparative methods.
thorax and abdomen, (2) head and neck,
Comparative methods examined will include
including neuroanatomy, and (3) limbs. It
a focus on historical biogeography as well
covers regional and conceptual information
as ancestral state reconstruction, rates of
on the gross anatomy of all organ systems in
evolution and diversification, and analysis of
the human body. Prerequisite: permission of
adaptation and key innovations.
instructor for students that are not enrolled in
4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Stony Brooks Physical Therapy Program.
HBA 560: Advanced Regional Anatomy
5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Advanced human gross anatomy for graduate
HBA 541: Evolutionary Anatomy
students or advanced undergraduates in
A lecture and laboratory with emphasis on
biology, anthropology and other life sciences.
dissection of the entire human body. Includes
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.
functional and comparative anatomy with
Fall, Summer, 3-8 credits, Letter graded (A,
special emphasis on the musculoskeletal
A-, B+, etc.)
morphology of humans and higher primates.
This course is offered as both DPA 541 and
HBA 561: Human Gross Anatomy
HBA 541.
A lecture and laboratory course that includes
Prerequisite: permission of instructor
dissections of the entire human body. The
Fall, 8 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) course is organized in three modules: (1)
thorax and abdomen, (2) head and neck,
HBA 542: Advanced Human Anatomy
including neuronatomy, and (3) limbs. It
for Physical Therapists
covers regional and conceptual information

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

113

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

Spring, even years, 2 credits, Letter graded (A, HBA 700: Dissertation Research off
A-, B+, etc.)
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
HBA 582: Comparative Anatomy of
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
Primates
off-campus, but in the United States and/
The comparative anatomy of living primates.
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
Laboratory dissection with emphasis on
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
Summer, 5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
relating structural diversity to behavior and
are considered on-campus. All international
etc.)
biomechanics. This course is offered as both
students must enroll in one of the graduate
HBA 582 and DPA 582.
HBA 563: Aspects of Animal
student insurance plans and should be advised
Mechanics
by an International Advisor.
Prerequisites: HBA 364 and previous
An introduction to biomechanics. Covers
course in human or vertebrate anatomy and
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
freebody mechanics and kinetics as applied to permission of instructor.
May be repeated for credit.
vertebrate locomotion. Considers the structure Spring, alternate years, 4 credits, Letter
and physiology of muscle as it relates to
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HBA 701: Dissertation Research off
adaptations of the musculoskeletal system.
Campus - International
HBA 590: Projects in Anatomical
This course is offered as both HBA 563 and
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
Sciences
DPA 563.
(G5). Major portion of research will take
Individual laboratory projects closely
place outside of the United States and/or
Prerequisites: Introductory physics and
supervised by faculty members to be carried
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
biology or permission of instructor.
option of the health plan and may also enroll
Spring, odd years, 2 credits, Letter graded (A, out in staff research laboratories.
in MEDEX. International students who are
A-, B+, etc.)
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.
in their home country are not covered by
Fall and Spring, 1-6 credits, S/U grading
HBA 564: Primate Evolution
mandatory health plan and must contact the
May be repeated 4 times FOR credit.
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
The taxonomic relationships and evolutionary
HBA 690: Graduate Seminar
be removed. International students who are
history of primates as documented by their
not in their home country are charged for the
fossil record and structural and chemical
Seminars by graduate students on current
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
evidence. Emphasis on primates prior to the
literature in the areas of the anatomical
covered by another insurance plan they must
origin of the human lineage. This course is
sciences.
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
offered as ANT 564, DPA 564 and HBA 564. Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.
charge will only be removed if other plan is
Spring, even years, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, Fall and Spring, 1 credit, S/U grading
deemed comparable.
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 3 times FOR credit.
on the gross anatomy of all organ systems in
the human body. Prerequisite: permission of
instructor for students that are not enrolled
in Stony Brook's Occupational Therapy,
Physician Assistant or Respiratory Therapy
programs.

HBA 565: Human Evolution
A survey of the fossil record of hominid
evolution through the Pliocene and Pleistocene
with emphasis on the morphological structure
and function of locomotor, masticatory,
and neural systems. Includes utilization of
comparative anatomical material and an
extensive cast collection. This course is offered
as ANT 565, DPA 565 and HBA 565.

HBA 692: Advanced Topics in
Anatomical Sciences Literature
Tutorial readings in anatomical sciences with
periodic conferences, reports and examinations
arranged with the instructor.

Fall, even years, 4 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)

HBA 695: Practicum in Teaching
Practical instruction in the teaching of
anatomical sciences carried out under faculty
supervision.

HBA 566: Studies in Functional
Morphology
Introduction to the theory and methods of
functional morphology. Various methods of
analysis and the application of experimental
techniques such as electromyography or bone
strain analysis are discussed as they pertain to
the understanding of the interaction between
form and function. Special emphasis is placed
on the analysis of human and nonhuman
primate morphology, and the application of
this analysis to interpretation of the fossil
evidence for human and nonhuman primate
evolution. This course is offered as both HBA
566 and DPA 566.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.

Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.
Fall and Spring, 1-2 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

1-4 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
HBA 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Original investigation under supervision of
thesis adviser and committee.
Prerequisite: Advancement to candidacy (G5);
permission of thesis advisor. Major portion
of research must take place on SBU campus,
at Cold Spring Harbor, or at the Brookhaven
National Lab.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

All international students must received
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
HBA 800: Full-Time Summer Research
Full-time laboratory research projects
supervised by staff members.
S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

HBC
Biochemistry
HBC 531: Molecular Foundations of
Medicine
An integrated course covering the important
aspects of biochemistry, cell biology, human
and molecular genetics, and histology.
Includes lectures, small group conferences and
laboratories and stresses the clinical relevance
of the basic science material.
8 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

HBH
Pharmacology
114

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
HBH 501: Principles of Pharmacology
Basic principles and mechanism of drug
distribution, absorption, metabolism
and elimination. Principles of chemical
carcinogenesis and tumor promotion.
Autonomic, Smooth Muscle and CNS
Pharmacology. Pharmacology of specific
drugs of historical interest including alcohol,
antibiotics, aspirin, nicotine and morphine.
Review of anticoagulants & thrombolytic
agents, antiparasitic, and drugs for the
treatment of allergic conditions and gout.
Includes discussion of specific cases taken
from clinical practice and a presentation based
on a set of selected readings. Crosslisted with
BCP 401

Spring 2021
distinguished scientists from academic and
industrial institutions. A 1 hr. Journal Club/
Discussion Session precedes seminar to
review a reference paper relevant to the
research concepts to be presented. Students
are expected to develop an understanding
of the scientific principles given in the
colloquium. Students are required to give a
formal presentation. Co-scheduled with BCP
406. Offered
Spring, 2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.

HBH 545: Biochemical Laboratory
Techniques
Introduces theoretical principles and
experimental techniques used in modern
biochemical research. Lectures and homework
assignments explore topics in basic molecular
and cellular techniques. Prerequisites:
Admission to Health Sciences Center program.
Fall, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.

HBH 546: Biochemical Laboratory
Techniques
Continuation of HBH545. Lectures
HBH 510: Practical Clinical Exposure
and demonstrations present topics in
for Translational Basic Scientists
chromatography, mass spectrometry, protein
Hospital Clinical Rotations-Physician
Fall, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
sequencing, sedimentation, electrophoresis,
Course faculty will arrange two, twoligand binding, basic pharmacological methods
week-long rotations (four weeks total).
HBH 502: Advanced Principles of
and statistical analysis of data. Includes
The following services are committed to
Pharmacology
procedures for the safe handling of toxic
participate: Anesthesiology-students will be
Advanced concepts of drug metabolism,
chemicals and radioisotopes. Prerequisites:
pharmacokinetics, biochemical and molecular offered opportunities in operating room (OR)
Permission of instructor, admission to graduate
mechanisms of drug action and drug resistance observation; pre-admission patient evaluations; Health Sciences Center program.
pain management clinic; and others depending
in human disease states. Toxicological
Spring, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
upon availability. Internal Medicine-students
agents and environmental pollutants.
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
will be offered opportunities in the medical
The pharmacology of autocoids, antiinflammatories, immunosuppressants and anti- intensive care unit (MICU); coronary care
HBH 549: Legal & Regulatory Issues in
unit (CCU); medical oncology; and others
asthmatics. Rational drug design and drug
Clinical Research combined with Ethics
receptor interactions using computer molecular depending upon availability. Others-depending &Professionalism in Clin. Rsrch.
upon availability. Student will be expected to
modeling techniques. Includes discussion of
Some of the sessions are part of the SBU
spend 3-4 hours daily in their assigned clinical
specific cases taken from clinical practice
course on Responsible Conduct of Research
activates (15-20 hours weekly; 60-80 hours
and a presentation based on a set of selected
and Scholarship (RCRS, formerly known
for the course). In addition, they will be asked
readings. Cross-listed with BCP 402
as GRD 500). During the course, major
to participate in special medical exercises
Spring, 4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
contemporary issues in legal and regulatory
arranged for them on an ad hoc basis by course
etc.)
arenas associated with scientific research are
faculty, both in the hospital pharmacy and
discussed. The course introduces students
elsewhere.
Finally
all
students
will
attend
HBH 505: Pharmacology to Pharmacy:
to the history behind the regulations that
weekly case conferences, 2hr each for all 4
Practical Clinical Aspects for Nonsafeguard human subjects, and educates
weeks. At these conferences, students will
Clinicians (Didactic)
students in detail about their responsibilities
be asked to prepare and present two clinical
This course, to be offered exclusively online,
as clinical investigators. Using an interactive
cases, based on two of the patients they have
is designed for students interested in health
case based format the topics covered include:
seen on their clinical rotations. It is expected
care (either basic medical science-oriented or
justification for human research and reasonable
that each student will be responsible for at
clinical). The class introduces many aspects
balance of risk versus benefits; the use of
least two presentations during the four-week
of clinical pharmacology, but is geared
animals in research; informed consent; the
course. Presentations will be graded by course
toward non-clinicians. Clinical Vignettes and
ethical challenges of clinical research; ethical
faculty, S (satisfactory) or U (unsatisfactory).
case discussions will be presented. Several
concerns associated with genetic testing and
The final grade for the course, also S or U, will
medical procedures will be first described
screening; research in minors and adults of
be determined both by these grades as well as
and then demonstrated. Understanding these
questionable capacity to consent; conflict
by overall attendance at all course activities.
procedures will be integral to appreciating the
of interest; investigator responsibilities with
0-3 credits, S/U grading
vignettes and clinical case discussions. The
regard to fulfilling government regulation;
May be repeated for credit.
multidisciplinary course faculty will include
scientific fraud and whistle blowing; the
physicians, scientists, educators, nurses and
scientific community and mentoring;
HBH 531: Pharmacology-Dental
pharmacists. Enrolled students will have the
authorship and attribution; special populations
Basic principles that underlie actions of drugs and inclusion of minorities; and emergency
opportunity to ask questions directly through
on physiological processes with particular
online chats.
research-related special requirements.
reference to their therapeutic and toxic actions.
0-3 credits, S/U grading
1 credit,
For medical and dental students. Prerequisites:
Physiology, biochemistry, permission of
HBH 506: Graduate Pharmacology
HBH 550: Statistics in Life Sciences
instructor and admission to Graduate Health
Colloquium
This course covers statistical concepts and
Sciences Center Program. Modules 4-6,
Research seminars in pharmacology
issues in the life sciences. Basic algebra is
5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
and toxicology presented by faculty and
assumed as a prerequisite. Topics covered
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

115

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
include: descriptive statistics, foundation of
statistical inference, sampling distribution,
point estimate and confidence internal,
comparison of independent and paired
samples, analysis of categorical data,
correlation, ANOVA, linear regression, and
nonparametric test.
1 credit, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
HBH 560: Proposal Preparation in
Regulatory Biology
A literature-based course focusing on major
research areas in molecular and biochemical
pharmacology. The first part of the course
will expose students to a series of examples
of recent grant proposals. The second part of
the course will feature student presentations
of their research proposals. Due to the
coordination of this course with the Qualifying
Exam, registration is limited to Pharmacology
graduate students.
Fall and Spring, 2 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
HBH 580: Selected Topics in
Pharmacology
Student seminars and readings on topics
arranged through consultation with staff.
0-1 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
HBH 585: Advanced Structural
Biology/Structural Methods in Drug
Discovery
This course is designed for students that want
to gain theoretical and practical experience
in macromolecular structure determination
through NMR spectroscopy and/or X-ray
crystallography. The course is organized
into two modules: NMR spectroscopy and
X-ray crystallography. Students may elect
to take one or both modules. Emphasis will
be placed on practical aspects of structural
determination, including sample preparation,
data collection and processing. In each of the
modules, students will be guided through a
complete structural determination project.
A final project report per module will be
required. Familiarity with Linux is desirable.
Students are encouraged to contact instructors
prior to enrolling. Crosslisted as BSB580 and
HBH585.
Spring, 0-4 credits, S/U grading
HBH 590: Pharmacology Seminars
Advanced research seminars by staff and
visiting lecturers.
Prerequisites: Full-time pharmacology
graduate status
Fall and Spring, 0-1 credits, S/U grading

Spring 2021
May be repeated for credit.
HBH 599: Graduate Research in
Pharmacological Sciences
Original research projects under faculty
supervision.
Prerequisites: Full-time pharmacology
graduate status
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 0-12 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
HBH 601: Practicum in Teaching
Pharmacology
Practical experience and instruction in the
teaching of pharmacology carried out under
faculty orientation and supervision.
Prerequisites: Full-time pharmacology
graduate status
Fall and Spring, 0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated 5 times FOR credit.

course and to actively participate in group
discussion.
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
HBH 633: Quantitative Methods in
Pharmacology
This course introduces second-year graduate
students to the quantitative approaches that
underlie modern research in Pharmacology.
Students will be exposed to tools and
techniques that are widely applied in different
fields of biomedical research. Students will
receive an introduction to the command line,
coding and statistics, and learn to apply these
tools to pharmacokinetic compartmental
analysis, molecular modeling, image analysis,
structural biology, biological big data analysis
and genomics. Students will be actively
engaged in data analysis and will be expected
to participate in group discussion.
3 credits,

HBH 631: Graduate Pharmacology I
Basic principles of pharmacology will be
discussed including pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics in both normal and
various disease states. Major problems in
human pharmacology will be considered
including obesity, diabetes, hypertension
and heart failure. Underlying physiology as
well as pathophysiologic background will be
presented. Drug design and development will
be discussed from both scientific and socioeconomic perspectives.
Prerequisites: Graduate Biochemistry,
Physiology HBY 561 or consent of instructor.
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
HBH 632: Graduate Pharmacology II
This course introduces second-year graduate
students to chemotherapy agents used to
combat bacterial and viral infections as well
as cancers. The course develops a detailed
understanding of the strategies involved in
identifying drug targets in these two diverse
therapeutic settings. The antibacterial lectures
emphasize the problem of drug resistance and
the need to develop new agents to combat
resistant organisms. The anti-cancer lectures
begin with a comprehensive analysis of the
molecular basis of cellulartransformation
leading to neoplastic disease. Lectures on
cancer therapy emphasize the contrast between
conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy and
novel therapeutic approaches guided by recent
developments in cancer research. Novel
computational biology and structural biology
approaches are featured throughout the course.
Each student is expected to make two formal
journal-club style presentations during the

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

HBH 655: Neuropharmacology
An advanced course for graduate students
interested in developing an understanding
of neuropharmacology and research on this
topic. Following a general introduction to the
nerve cell structure, synaptic and chemical
transmission, three themes receptors, receptors
as channels, and G-protein-coupled receptors
are developed. Recent advances in cell and
molecular biology provide the framework
for instruction and discussion. This course
is offered as both HBH 655 and BNB 655.
Prerequisiste: Admission to Graduate Health
Sciences Center Program.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
HBH 656: Cell Biology
Introduction to the structural and functional
organization of cells and tissues and to
the way structure relates to function.
Particular emphasis is placed on nuclear and
chromosomal structure, signal transduction,
protein translocation, the cytoskeleton and
the extracellular matrix. The interaction of
cellular structures and components and their
regulation is stressed as is the organization
and interaction of cells in tissues. The course
is comparative and includes examples of cells
and tissues from vertebrates, invertebrates,
plants, and prokaryotic systems. Prerequisite:
matriculation in graduate program or
permission of instructor.
Spring, 3-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
HBH 699: Dissertation Research in
Campus
116

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Original investigation undertaken as part
of the Ph.D. program under supervision of
thesis adviser and committee. Prerequisite:
Advancement to candidacy (G5); permission
of thesis advisor. Major portion of research
must take place on SBU campus, at Cold
Spring Harbor, or at the Brookhaven National
Lab.
Prerequisite: Full-time pharmacology
graduate status
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 0-9 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.
HBH 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
Prerequisite: Full-time pharmacology
graduate status
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
HBH 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
in MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.
All international students must receive
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
HBH 800: Full-Time Summer Research
Full-time laboratory research projects
supervised by staff members. Summer Term.
Prerequisites: Full-time pharmacology
graduate status.
S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

Spring 2021

HBM
Molecular Genetics and
Microbiology
HBM 503: Molecular Genetics
Introduces the classical work and current
developments in lower and higher genetic
systems. Covers gene structure and regulation
in prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms,
mutational analysis and mapping, transposable
elements, and biological DNA transfer
mechanisms. Bacteriophage as well as lower
and higher eukaryotic systems are used
to illustrate aspects of molecular genetic
structure and function. This course is offered
as both MCB 503 and HBM 503. Prerequisite:
matriculation in graduate program or
permission of instructor
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HBM 509: Experimental Molecular
Genetics and Microbiology
An introduction to modern microbiological
research. The selection of laboratories is made
in consultation with the student's advisory
committee. By taking part in ongoing projects
the student will learn experimental procedures
and techniques and become acquainted with
research opportunities in the department.
Prerequisites: Matriculation in a graduate
program and permission of the graduate
studies director and the lab director
Fall, 1-8 credits, S/U grading
HBM 510: Experimental Molecular
Genetics and Microbiology
An introduction to modern microbiological
research. The selection of laboratories is made
in consultation with the student's advisory
committee. By taking part in ongoing projects
the student will learn experimental procedures
and techniques and become acquainted with
research opportunities in the department.
Prerequisites: Matriculation in a graduate
program and permission of the graduate
studies director and the lab director
Spring, 1-8 credits, S/U grading
HBM 522: Biology of Cancer
A short course with the emphasis on cancer
as a disease of man. Lectures address human
cancer as seen by the clinician and as basic
research relates to human disease. This
course provides students with a link between
courses in cell and molecular biology and the
application of this basic information to tumor
management. Offered as HBM 522 and HPH
659. Offered Spring

HBM 599: Graduate Research in
Molecular Genetics and Microbiology
Original investigations under faculty
supervision.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall and Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
HBM 640: Molecular Mechanisms of
Microbial Pathogenesis
This course covers the principles and
molecular mechanisms of pathogenesis of a
selected group of the best understood viral
and bacterial pathogens. A major focus of the
course relates to pathogen modification of
host extracellular and intracellular signalling
events, as well as pathogen-host interactions
pertaining to the innate, humoral and cellular
responses to infection. The material is
presented by invited lecturers who are leaders
in their fields. This courses is directed to
graduate students, post-doctorate and medical
fellows, and advanced medical students, who
are are contemplating careers in infectious
disease research. Prerequisite: HBM, BMO
503 and BMO 520
3-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HBM 690: Molecular Genetics and
Microbiology Seminar
A weekly meeting devoted to current work
in the department. Enrolled students present
seminars each week throughout the term.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.
Fall and Spring, 0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
HBM 691: Readings in Molecular
Genetics and Microbiology Literature
Readings in microbiology literature covering
areas of molecular biology and genetics.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.
Fall, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
HBM 692: Experimental Methods in
Molecular Genetics and Microbiology
The goal of this course is to introduce students
to the rationale underlying the wide array of
new methods in biology, as well as to promote
the critical analysis of scientific literature.
Lectures will be given about various scientific
methods and approaches, and journal articles
relating to the concepts introduced will be
assigned. A separate discussion section will be
held to review and critique the articles, to be
led by the students.
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

117

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
HBM 693: Reseach Proposal
Preparation in Molecular Genetics and
Microbiology
A course, based upon the literature in
molecular genetics and microbiology, to
instruct students in scientific writing and the
preparation of research proposals. The course
will be organized in three parts. In the first
section of the course, students will become
familiar with the components of the research
proposal and will read and evaluate proposals
written by the training faculty. Lectures given
by the course co-directors will cover the
basics of scientific writing, research proposal
preparation and the problems and concerns
commonly voiced by reviewers of research
proposals. In the second section, students
will develop two short proposals in the area
of molecular genetics and microbiology that
are unrealted to their graduate research. One
of these short proposals will be selected for
development into a full proposal. In the third
section, students will develop and write the
full proposal. The students' skills in proposal
preparation will be enhnaced by critiquing the
short and full proposals presented by other
students in the second and third sections of the
course.

Spring 2021
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.
HBM 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. All international students
must enroll in one of the graduate student
insurance plans and should be advised by an
International Advisor.

Prerequisites: Undergraduate degree, health
care experience, biochemistry or cell biology,
anatomy and microbiology.
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)

HBP 533: Immunology
Principles of immunology for graduate
students in the biological sciences, including
definition of antigens and antibodies,
specificity of the immune response,
immunoglobulin structure, the genetics
of immunoglobulin synthesis, cellular
Fall, Spring, Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U grading cooperation in the immune response,
hypersensitivity, tolerance immunogenetics.
May be repeated for credit.
Open to advanced undergraduates.
HBM 701: Dissertation Research off
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Campus - International
HBP 556: Laboratory Medicine
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
A four-week full-time (6 hr, day) course
place outside of the United States and/or
dealing with clinical laboratory decision
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
making and the basis for the laboratory
option of the health plan and may also enroll
evaluation of human evaluation of human
in MEDEX. International students who are
disease. Didactic and practical presentations by
in their home country are not covered by
interdepartmental faculty. Intended principally
mandatory health plan and must contact the
for senior medical students, but also for
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
advanced microbiology or biochemistry
be removed. International students who are
students interested in clinical applications.
not in their home country are charged for the
Offered
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
Spring, 6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
covered by another insurance plan they must
etc.)
etc.)
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
HBM 696: Pandemics in Human History charge will only be removed if other plan is
HBP 590: Seminars in Immunology
deemed comparable.
In a joint credit-bearing course, 12 students
A series of monthly seminars focusing on
(at the advanced Bachelor and beginning
All international students must received
research in progress by the participants, current
Master level) from three partner institutions
clearance from an International Advisor.
journal articles in the field of immunobiology,
will develop a 360 degree view of six different Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
and prepared reviews of specified areas in the
pandemics that occurred in human history.
May be repeated for credit.
general field.
Tuberculosis, Influenza, Dengue, SARS/
Prerequisite: MCB Graduate Students
HBM 800: Full-Time Summer Research
Covid 19, HIV, antimicrobial resistance.
Fall and Spring, 1 credit, S/U grading
Each pandemic will be covered by one
Full-time laboratory research projects
May be repeated for credit.
expert who also serves as a mentor for the
supervised by staff members.
students. Expert-mentors will be recruited
HBP 622: Clinical Pathologic
0-1 credits, S/U grading
from the partners' networks. Six international
Correlations: Gross Pathology
May be repeated for credit.
student pairs will each explore one pandemic
Correlative exercises in clinical pathology and
and compare its consequences as well as
human gross anatomic pathology including
measures taken against them in different parts
surgical biopsy material. Open to students in
of the world. In addition, students will gain
medical sciences.
Pathology
insights into public health institutions (WHO,
Prerequisites: Systems pathology and general
CDC, RKI etc.). Students will get different
pathology course. Permission of instructor.
perspectives on pandemics, which are of global HBP 511: Pathobiology for Graduate
Fall, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
Health
Care
Practitioners
concern, while measures against them are
etc.)
usually taken on a national level.
For graduate students who have obtained
May be repeated for credit.
primary
health
care
baccalaureate
degrees
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
through the case study approach. Covers the
May be repeated 6 times FOR credit.
HBP 691: Journal Club in Pathology
underlying principles of modern experimental
Provides students with a forum for acquiring
HBM 699: Dissertation Research on
pathology. Focuses on the clinical aspects of
Campus
the body system, including relevant underlying skills involved in the critical analysis and
biochemistry, structure, or pathophysiology at presentation of scientific data by active
For the student who has been advanced to
participation in seminars of major topics in
the organ, tissue, cell or molecular level.
candidacy (G5); permission of dissertation
cellular and molecular pathology, and critical
advisor.

HBP

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

118

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

discussion of selected topics with presentation
of papers from the literature.

independent work-up of selected cases.
Primarily for health sciences professionals.

Prerequisite: MCB Graduate Student
Fall and Spring, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

HBP 971: Renal Clinicopathologic
Correlations
HBP 966: Hematology Conference
A case-oriented, postgraduate course in renal
Teaches a given aspect of hematology,
biopsy interpretation and its relationship to
oncology or immunology. Staff from medicine, patient management.
pathology, and nuclear medicine participate,
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
and usually presents a case to introduce the
May be repeated for credit.
subject. Various teaching aids, such as review
of pathological material, are used. Primarily
for health sciences professionals.

HBY

1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Physiology and Biophysics

lecture format with the emphasis on problem
solving. Relevant clinical correlations are
addressed at the end of each block in so far
as they illustrate how symptoms and signs of
disease result from disordered physiology.
Organ Systems addresses the structure and
function of the cardiovascular, respiratory,
renal, gastrointestinal, endocrine, skeletal,
reproductive, and integumenary systems.
Prerequisites: Admission to medical or dental
school and permission of instructor. Only
Spring.
8 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HBY 554: Principles of Neuroscience
The aim of this course is to highlight and
create an understanding as to how the human
nervous system operates.

HBY 500: Short Term Research
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Projects in Physiology and Biophysics
Short term research project (rotation) under the HBY 557: Advanced Physiology
supervision of a staff member.
This course is designed to introduce students
Prerequisite: Must be a Graduate Students in
to integrative approaches in biomedical
the Dept. of Physiology & Biophysics.
research. Emphasis will be placed on
Spring, 1-12 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, the primary physiological concepts of
etc.)
control, communication, signal processsing,
May be repeated 4 times FOR credit.
metabolism and replication. Prerequisites:
Systems Physiology, Biochemistry and
HBY 501: Physiology
Permission of Instructor.
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Introduces normal function of human tissues
May be repeated for credit.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
and organs and their regulation by nervous
etc.)
HBP 968: Advanced Clinical Pathologic and endocrine systems. Emphasizes the
organization and function of physiological
Correlations: Gross Pathology
HBY 561: Statistical Analysis of
control systems and the maintenance of a
Physiological Data
Postgraduate correlative exercises in human
constant
internal
environment.
Enrollment
gross pathologic anatomy that emphasize the
Statistical methods useful in analyzing
gross pathologic basis for altered function and restricted to fully matriculated graduate
common types of physiological data. Topics
students, with permission of instructor. Only
clinical manifestations of disease. Open to
include probability, data distributions,
Fall.
physicians and others with advanced degrees
hypothesis testing with parametric and non4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
in medical sciences.
parametric methods, ANOVA, regression and
correlation, and power analysis. Emphasis
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HBY 530: Cellular Physiology and
is on experimental design and appropriate,
May be repeated for credit.
Biophysics
efficient use of statistical software.
Cellular structure and function. Topics include Offered
HBP 969: Anatomical and Surgical
ion channels, excitability, transport, energetics Spring, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Pathology for Residents in Pathology
and metabolism, contraction, secretion, and
To provide practical and clinical experience
communication within and between cells.
HBY 562: Model-based Analysis of
in tissue pathology. During the four week
Emphasizes quantitative analysis of cellular
Physiological Data
elective the student is given the opportunity
processes.
to participate in all aspects of autopsies as
The analysis of common biochemical
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
well as gross and microscopic examination of
and physiological data by non-linear
surgical specimens. There is ongoing review
regression of data models and biophysical
HBY 531: Medical Physiology
of general and organ system pathology to
models of physiological and biochemical
A graduate-level introduction to the
reinforce structural-functional correlations.
processes. Examples include binding kinetics,
physiology of the organ systems with
This elective is selected by students who
compartmental mass transfer and spectral
ultrastructural correlations. Ultrastructural
plan a career in pathology as a "hands-on"
analysis.
correlations are demonstrated in a laboratory
introduction to the specialty. The elective is
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor, HBY
also chosen by others, particularly individuals setting using histological preparations in
561
conjunction with electron micrographs
who will enter radiology, and who seek to
Fall, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
correlate radiographic and pathologic anatomy. illustrating the relevant ultrastructure needed
to understand the normal functioning of
Students who are sufficiently interested and
HBY 564: Experimental Techniques in
tissues and organs. The physiology of
motivated may become involved in relatively
Systems Physiology
the major organ systems is addressed in a
HBP 967: Tumor Conference
Considers problems in the management
of patients with a malignancy and
recommendations for a course of therapy
for each patient including a review of a
particular aspect of cancer treatment or
natural history in depth. Functions as the link
between the hospital and the Eastern Oncology
Cooperative Group. Primarily for health
science professionals.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

119

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
A series of lectures and laboratory exercises
designed to introduce students to in vivo
experimental techniques used in systems
physiology. Emphasis will be placed on
the ethical use of rodents in biomedical
research and the measurement of physiological
variables. Data acquisition and analysis
procedures used in cardiovascular, respiratory,
neural, and renal physiology will also be
covered. Only

Spring 2021
1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
HBY 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.

writers such as Jerome Groopman, MD. The
dynamics of medical mistakes and forgiveness
will be explored through psychiatrist Aaron
Lazarre's influential writings on effective
medical apologies. Some philosophical and
metaphysical aspects of personhood and selfidentity will be introduced.
Offered in Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)

HCB 502: Landmark Cases in Bioethics
What is a life worth living? How do we
HBY 570: Student Journal Club
decide, and who decides, when to use medical
Graduate student presentation on a selected
technologies such as incubators, ventilators,
topic with faculty consultation.
transplants and reproductive technologies?
1-9 credits, S/U grading
This is an intensive introduction to some of
May be repeated for credit.
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
the cases in medical ethics that have changed
May be repeated for credit.
HBY 701: Dissertation Research off
the ways that we are born, cared for, and
die in American hospitals. Examples of
HBY 590: Special Topics in Physiology Campus - International
topics include: vaccination and public health;
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
and Biophysics
eugenics and human subjects research ethics;
(G5). Major portion of research will take
Students seminars on topics to be arranged
the right of privacy and health care; end-ofplace
outside
of
the
United
States
and/or
through consultation with faculty members.
life planning and treatment; women's bodies
U.S.
provinces.
Domestic
students
have
the
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.
and fetal rights; disability rights; religious
option of the health plan and may also enroll
Offered
beliefs and health care; triage and allocation of
in MEDEX. International students who are
Fall and Spring, 1 credit, S/U grading
scarce resources; mental illness and individual
in their home country are not covered by
May be repeated for credit.
rights; global clinical trials; and, bioethics and
mandatory health plan and must contact the
culture.
Insurance
Office
for
the
insurance
charge
to
be
HBY 591: Physiology and Biophysics
removed.
Offered in Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
Research
B+, etc.)
Original investigation under the supervision of 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May
be
repeated
for
credit.
a staff member.
HCB 503: Traditions and Values in
1-12 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HBY 800: Full-Time Summer Research Bioethical Conflicts
May be repeated for credit.
This course serves as an introduction to
Full-time laboratory research projects
Western moral and religious traditions and
supervised
by
staff
members.
HBY 690: Seminar in Physiology and
to the positions about killing, saving, and
S/U
grading
Biophysics
enhancing that these traditions have informed.
May
be
repeated
for
credit.
Seminars and discussions on major topics in
It explores the interface between religion
physiology and biophysics by students, staff,
and biomedical ethics and then delves into
and visiting scientists. Prerequisite: Permission
specific issues in health care in light of more
of instructor
general normative concerns such as justice,
Medical Humanities,
0-1 credits, S/U grading
love, autonomy and rights, utilitarianism, selfMay be repeated for credit.
sacrifice, gender, virtue, and community. The
Compassionate Care &
issues with which the course deals address
Bioethics
HBY 695: Practicum in Teaching in
the plights of real people, in the concrete,
Physiology and Biophysics
who come from particular backgrounds and
HCB 501: Compassionate Care,
Practical experience and instruction in the
whose set of values may make them sometimes
Medical Humanities, and the Illness
teaching of physiology and biophysics carried Experience
recalcitrant to possibilities that technology has
out under faculty orientation and supervision.
made (or is just now making) available.
This course will introduce students to major
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Offered
interpretations of the illness experience,
May be repeated for credit.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
to several classical biographical and
autobiographical accounts of illness, and to the
HBY 699: Dissertation Research on
HCB 504: Special Topic in
important dynamic of compassionate care in
Campus
Biotechnology
the healing relationship. The patient-as-person
Original (thesis) research undertaken with
Just because we can do it, does this mean
will be emphasized throughout, as well as the
the supervision of a member of the staff.
ways in which respect for and empathy toward that we should do it? This course takes a
Prerequisite: Advancement to candidacy (G5); the patient impacts diagnostic accuracy,
focused look at controversial practices in
permission of thesis advisor. Major portion
patient adherence, and patient and professional health care settings, such as organ donation
of research must take place on SBU campus,
and enhancements, which have been (and
satisfaction. Some emotional dynamics of the
at Cold Spring Harbor, or at the Brookhaven
are continuing to be) made available with
illness experience will be addressed, such as
National Lab.
hope, through the work of eminent physician- the advancement of technology. Ought we to
regard that which technology makes available
2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

HCB

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

120

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
as uncontroversially good? If not, why not?
What sorts of new issues regarding distributive
justice, autonomy, utility, and compassion
are ours to consider carefully because of the
changing world in which we live?

Spring 2021

China, and under many other names in cultures
around the world. Recently, the process of
globalization of ideas, medical practices,
Offered in Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, clinical trials, and migration of patients has
led to clashes of culture around issues such as
B+, etc.)
the appropriate standards and control groups
Offered in Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
for clinical trials, organ transplantation, brain
HCB 512: Altruism and Bioethics
A-, B+, etc.)
What is altruism, and what are its evolutionary death, and end-of-life care. Issues of religion,
morality, public policy, disability rights
HCB 510: Literature, Compassion, and roots as a moral dynamic? What impact does
and policy, and health system structure and
Medical Care
altruistic action have on the human agent?
payment all shape how particular societies
How does literature help us understand
Does it impact flourishing and health? When
the nature of human illness and suffering?
is it experienced as overwhelming by medical decide to manage divisive issues such as the
beginning and end of life. This course will
Can written works of art, ancient and
professionals? Where does altruism fit within
draw on a growing literature on global and
contemporary, that depict moments of
medical and nursing professionalism? How
transnational cases, policies, and traditions in
compassion and compassionate acts lay
is it related to compassionate care? What
the ethics of health, public health, and health
bare the moral, spiritual, psychological, and
about the duty to treat in time of epidemic,
care.
physical reality of suffering? There is a long
auto-experimentation, pro-bono medical
association between literature and medicine,
treatment, high-risk provision of healthcare in Offered in Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
from the viewpoint of physician-writers,
time of conflict, healthcare activism, and the
such as Anton Checkov and William Carlos
commitment to the patient's good as a guiding
HCB 515: Health Policy, History &
Williams, whose literary skills have eclipsed
professional ideal? How does the practitioner
Ethics
their medical backgrounds. Sherlock Holmes
strike a balance between the care of patients
and Doctor Watson were the creations of
and the care of the nearest and dearest or the
Who gets sick? Who gets health care, what
a physician-writer, Arthur Conan Doyle.
care of the self? How does altruism correlate
kind, and in what setting? This course covers
Physicians portrayed in literature, such as Dr.
with pro-social behavior, happiness, and
the major health policy issues of the United
Bernard Rieux, in Albert Camus The Plague,
health?
States today, including the health status of
have also explored the relationship between
Offered in Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, the U.S. as a whole, the social and economic
patient and doctor, the nature of healing.
determinants of health, the role of personal and
B+, etc.)
This semester-long course will study these
public health services in affecting health, the
relationships through reading of poetry, drama, HCB 513: Disease and Society
organization and financing of health services,
fiction, memoir, and essay and reflect on the
and the multiple factors affecting health
What is disease? How do the beliefs, politics,
nature of suffering, the intrinsic human need
policies. We will explore the evolution of the
and economies of particular societies shape
for compassion, and the implications for health how diseases are defined, experienced,
US health care system in the past century,
and healing.
and debates about rights to health care or lack
and treated? In this seminar, students will
Offered in Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, explore these questions by analyzing historical thereof, health disparities, conflicts of interest,
and the ethics of health policy and practice.
B+, etc.)
documents, scientific reports, and historical
HCB 511: Bioethics, Disability &
Community
Most people will experience disability at some
point in their lives, and for some it will shape
their social, personal, family, educational,
and employment experiences. Viewpoints
on disabilities which have emerged in policy
and the broader culture have been explicitly
challenged by emerging communities of
people with disabilities who seek to speak
for themselves and claim full inclusion in
society. In this context, bioethicists and
disability scholars have found points of
both common cause and stark disagreement
over issues such as neonatal and end-of-life
care, the value and values inherent medical
decisions and their outcomes. These bioethical
debates occur in the context of debates over
the rights of individuals with disabilities
to self-determination, accommodations for
work and schooling, and the potential for
people with disabilities to make unique
contributions because of--rather than despite-their disabilities. This course will consider
major debates in bioethics in light of recent

scholarship in disability studies, drawing on
perspectives from philosophy, literature and
narrative, history, and sociology.

scholarship. We will look at disease from
multiple perspectives as a biological process,
clinical entity, population phenomenon,
historical actor, and personal experience. We
will pay special attention to how diseases
have been recognized, diagnosed, named,
classified and counted in different times,
places, cultures, and settings based on different
environmental and social conditions, medical
ideas, diagnostic technologies, and available
treatments. The course will begin with a
review of major approaches to understanding
the manifold relationships between disease
and society. The remainder of the course
will view disease and society relationships
through the lens of specific issues, such as
epidemic disease, consumption and affluence,
globalization, and risk.

Offered in Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
HCB 516: Ethical Issues in Human
Reproduction
New technologies have modified human
reproduction in numerous ways, raising
profound questions about the moral status
of human life and the nature of parental and
sibling obligations. This course will investigate
the values that attach to different relationships,
both familial and general. It will cover
questions around the treatment of infertility,
surrogate mothering, the commodification
of the body, and the elevated expectations of
familial obligations that correspond to new
reproductive technologies.

Offered in Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
Offered in Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, A-, B+, etc.)
B+, etc.)
HCB 517: The Problem of Evil:
HCB 514: Global Bioethics
Philosophical, Biological, and Social
Dimensions
Bioethics is an American invention. Ideas
about medicine and morality, of course, go
What is the nature of evil? Can it be the
back to antiquity and are documented as
result of brain malfunction, something that
medical ethics in Europe, medical morality in
is genetically predetermined? Or, is evil

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

121

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
something which is part of or at least necessary
to know the good? Alternatively, is evil an
arbitrary designation, a perspective from which
we can wrest ourselves given the right sort
of reinvention? In this class, we shall address
the problem of evil from scientific, socialscientific, and philosophical perspectives,
using fiction and non-fictional sources.
Examples of medical evil, such as the Nazi
doctors or Tuskeegee, can be introduced as
case studies.
Offered in Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
HCB 518: Empirical Bioethics
The formal study of bioethics attempts to
define ethical courses of action in a world
ever increasing in complexity. But in day to
day practice, ethical outcomes are expressed
through the individual decisions and resulting
actions--of human agents. How do individuals
form these judgments? How do people
become motivated to engage in behaviors
that are designed to benefit someone else?
We will explore current scientific approaches
to these questions with several areas of
emphasis, including a) the neuroscience
of compassionate care and altruism, b)
cognitive and neuroscientific approaches
to understanding judgment and decision
making in ethical domains, and c) empirical
approaches to quantifying the effects of
ethically based policy decisions.
Offered in Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
HCB 519: Public Health Law
This course is a survey of legal and policy
issues that have special relevance for public
health professionals. Topics may vary, but
typically will include many of the following:
structure of the U.S. legal system; power
of state and federal governments in matters
affecting health care; governmental power
and the right to privacy; constitutional issues
in social welfare benefits; governmental
regulation of health care providers and payers;
the scope and discretion of administrative
agencies in health care; the antitrust laws; the
fraud and abuse laws; and negligence in the
delivery and financing of health care. The
course is taught primarily by Socratic method.
Offered in Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
HCB 520: Bioethics and Film
Film and television, both fiction and
nonfiction, capture man of the human
tragedies, challenges, and possibilities that
are debated in bioethics books, articles,
newspapers, on hospital ethics committees,
and in daily clinical care. This course will

Spring 2021
explore themes of birth, death, hope, fear,
faith, finitude and resource allocation through
watching, analyzing, and reading about
bioethics issues in visual media. The course
will draw on material from philosophical
ethics to history, health policy, and film
criticism to place these issues and their
portrayals in context.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HCB 521: Clinical Ethics Practicum
As difficult as settling abstract ethical issues
in medicine may be, the delivery of ethical
care presents its own set of difficulties. This
course aims to introduce students to the
practices hospitals employ to ensure the care
they deliver meets the relevant legal and
moral requirements. At the end of this course,
students will have been exposed to many
basic, and some advanced, aspects of clinical
ethics theory and practice. They will be able
to identify, describe, and analyze ethical
dilemmas in clinical cases, and will develop
an appreciation for the complexity and multidisciplinary nature of ethical dilemmas in
clinical medicine and will be able to apply
what they have learned to assess ethical, social,
and legal aspects of cases.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
HCB 524: Special Topics in Bioethics
Bioethicists are frequently asked to consider
the ethical ramifications of new research
findings and emerging technologies as they
arise. This course will examine one such issue
in close detail.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
HCB 598: Independent Study
3 Credits, ABCF Grading
0-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.

HCB 599: Special Projects Capstone
Course
This course, to be offered in the second
(spring) semester, is designed to satisfy the
special projects requirement of our program.
The first part of the course will be devoted to
readings and discussions that further illuminate
the methodologies of the interdisciplinary
field of medical humanities, compassionate
care, and bioethics. Students will develop an
appreciation for the standards of high quality
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
scholarship and research through review of
carefully selected readings. This will prepare
HCB 522: The Role of Virtue Ethics in
them for the second part of the course, where
Medicine
they pursue and present their own research
Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics and the role
based on the existing literature. This capstone
of virtue ethics are central to many religious
course will be highly collaborative, entail
traditions including Buddhism, Christianity,
substantial peer review, and be organized
Confucianism, and the philosophical traditions. around the development of significant student
Key virtues include honesty, courage,
projects which are intended to represent the
generosity, prudence, justice, compassion,
beginnings of publishable papers. Our entire
benevolence, loyalty, and hospitality. This
faculty will be involved in these projects
course explores the real and potential role
according to their specific areas of expertise.
of virtue on the development of virtuous
Offered in Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
physicians. The course's texts offer two
A-, B+, etc.)
diametrically opposed views on the role of
virtue in medicine, i.e., one is that virtue can
be channeled into the training of medical
professionals, whereas the other is that
Oral Biology and Pathology
bioethics has extracted virtue from medicine.
Through readings, documentaries, dialogue
HDO 500: Biology of the Oral
and active leadership of sessions by students,
the course will interrogate the claims as well as Mineralized Tissues
possibilities for a role of virtue in medicine.
This course deals with the basic chemistry,
crystallography, ultrastructure, and metabolism
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
of the calcium phosphates involved in the
formation and physiological and pathological
HCB 523: Special Topics in Medical
resorption of the various mineralized tissues
Humanities
found in or associated with the oral cavity
As with all multidisciplinary pursuits, the
medical humanities project is characterized by (enamel, dentin, cementum, bone). Ectopic
an ongoing negotiation among its practitioners calculus formation will be examined.
Prerequisites: HDO 560, 561, 562, and 563 or
over methods, scope and goals. This course
their equivalent. Fall and Spring
will examine, in detail, one of the latest

HDO

debates within the field.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
122

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
HDO 510: Salivary Metabolism and
Secretion
Consideration is given to the normal and
abnormal structure and function of the
glandular systems found in the oral cavity. The
composition, regulation, and functions of the
secretions from the major and minor salivary
glands will receive particular attention.

Spring 2021
presented, including the relationship of
nutrition to inflammation and oral health. The
microbiology of the oral cavity in health and
disease as well as oral mucosal infections is
presented as the basis of the understanding
of immunopathobiology of dental caries and
periodontal disease. The oral manifestations
of pharmacologic agents are reviewed in
terms of both their immunologic and nonimmunologic mechanisms of pathology.
Finally, antimicrobial chemotherapy and
principles of infection control are reviewed in
terms of clinical practice of dentistry.

discussions on topics in an informal setting.
The course content is based on the "Principles
of Mucosal Immunology" textbook.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

HDO 550: Oral Diagnostics and
Therapeutic Technology, Lectures and
Laboratory Techniques
Recent advances in the use and development
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
of research technology for the early diagnosis
and treatment monitoring of oral and systemic
HDO 520: Oral Microbial Systems
disease. Special attention is paid to the
Consideration is given to the structural
principles of technology transfer including
composition, metabolism, and environmental
2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
patents and patenting; searching of on-line
relationships of the bacterial systems formed
databases is a key component. The course
on and in association with the oral hard and
HDO 533: Regional Anatomy, Orofacial includes relationships of dry mouth to salivary
soft tissues. Specific and mixed bacterial
Neuroscience and Pain Control
physiology, diabetes, and drug medications;
populations, such as those resident on extraThis
course
includes
a
series
of
lectures
salivary film measurements, wetting of oral
oral mucosal surfaces and the skin and
and
discussions
dealing
with
head
and
surfaces, viscoelasticity and lubricity; the
their role in oral disease will be dealt with.
neck gross anatomy and microanatomy and
use of the Periotron and enzyme assays for
Prerequisite: HDO 560, 561, 562, and 563 or
biochemistry of orofacial pain. It will provide the diagnosis of gingivitis and periodontal
their equivalent. Fall and Spring
an in-depth understanding of the underlying
disease; instrumentation used in sensitive
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
neuroanatomy and biochemical events leading teeth measurement and evaluation of treatment
to the perception of acute and chronic orofacial effectiveness using oral compositions and
HDO 530: Molecular Biology and
pain.
iontophoresis; oral candidiasis and denture
Pathology of the Periodontium
stomatitis and early detection and causes of
2
credits,
Letter
graded
(A,
A-,
B+,
etc.)
This course deals with the ultrastructure and
dental caries; oral malodor measurements
biochemical composition of the periodontal
HDO 535: Epithelial Keratinization and including use of the Halimeter and its use
tissues, remodeling of the extracellular
in the formulation of oral compositions.
Differentiation
matrix with an emphasis on the role of
Application to clinical practice and clinical
The
course
examines
the
growth
and
metalloproteinases; the microbial interrelations
studies is covered.
differentiation
of
stratified
sqamous
epithelia.
with the organic and inorganic components
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Particular emphasis is placed on molecular
of the periodontal tissues, the biochemical
events involved in the differentiation program.
dynamics of gingival inflammation and
HDO 560: Oral Biology and Pathology I
Consideration is also given to mechanisms
wound healing, and the metabolic processes
involved
in
oral
and
cutaneous
disorders.
The first of four comprehensive courses
responsible for the composition and flow of
Prerequisites: Permission of instructor
on molecular structure, biochemical and
gingival crevicular fluid. Prerequisites: HDO
required; HBP 531 suggested; students
physiological function, developmental
560, 561 and 563 or their equivalent. Fall and
must
have
had
a
background
in
cellular
anatomy and pathology of the various systems
Spring. Please note that this may be taken
biochemistry molecular biology.
that constitute the oral apparatus. Covers the
twice for a total of 4 credits.
embryological development of the face and
Fall
and
Spring,
2
credits,
Letter
graded
(A,
2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
oral cavity and the biology and pathology of
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
the oral mineralized tissues. Prerequisites:
Undergraduate degree in basic science;
HDO 541: Principles of Mucosal
HDO 531: Normal and Reparative
permission of instructor. Fall and Spring
Immunology
Tissue Development in the Oral Cavity
The mucosal immune system is essentially the 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
This course includes a series of lectures
primary site of interaction between invading
and student-led discussions dealing with
pathogens and the immune system. The overall HDO 561: Oral Biology and Pathology
specific oral tissues, biologic mineralization,
II
aim of this graduate course is to facilitate a
osseointegration, hard and soft tissue
deeper understanding of the fundamentals of
The second of four comprehensive courses
development, and tissue regeneration. The
the immune system at mucosal surfaces. It
on molecular structure, biochemical and
molecular aspects leading to oral cancer and
will
provide
a
broad
overview
of
several
core
physiological function, developmental
osteonecrosis will also be presented and
mucosal immunology topics and has been
anatomy and pathology of the various systems
discussed.
designed for graduate students and post-docs
that constitute the oral apparatus. Covers the
2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
who have recently entered the field. This class biology and pathology of the periodontal
will provide in-depth analysis of the structural structures and the microbiology of the oral
HDO 532: Host-Parasite Interaction
features that distinguish the mucosal immune
cavity. Prerequisites: Undergraduate degree
This course includes a series of lectures
system from the peripheral immune system.
in basic science; permission of instructor. Fall
and student-led discussions dealing with
Features of innate and adaptive immunity as
and Spring
specific oral tissues, growth factors, ctyokines,
they relate to mucosal immune responses will
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
prostaglandins, biologic mineralization
also be covered. As well as delivering in depth
and wound healing. The biology of the
lectures on relevant and emerging topics the
HDO 562: Oral Biology and Pathology
immune system and phagocytic cells is
course will engage participants in interactive
III
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

123

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
This course is the third of four comprehensive
courses on molecular structure, biochemical
and physiological function, developmental
anatomy, and pathology of the various
systems that constitute the oral apparatus. The
course consists of' the following two units of
instruction; (1) the biology and pathology of
the salivary glands and their products and (2)
the biology and pathology of the periodontal
structures, Prerequisites: Undergraduate degree
in basic science and permission of instructor
Fall and Spring
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HDO 563: Oral Biology and Pathology
IV
This course is the last of four comprehensive
courses on molecular structure, biochemical
and physiological function, developmental
anatomy and pathology of the various systems
that constitute the oral apparatus. Covers the
biology and pathology of the oral sensory
systems and the biology and pathology of oral
motor systems. Prerequisites: Undergraduate
degree in basic science and permission of
instructor. Admission to Graduate Health
Sciences Center Program.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HDO 590: Research Projects in Oral
Biology and Pathology
Individual laboratory projects closely
supervised by faculty members to be carried
out in their research laboratories.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
HDO 599: Graduate Research
Original investigations undertaken with
supervision of a faculty member.
1-12 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
HDO 690: Oral Biology and Pathology
Seminar
Research seminars by students, staff, and
visiting scientists which may include review
of current literature and presentation of student
research. Prerequisite: Enrollment in the MS or
PhD program in Oral Biology and Pathology.
Fall and Spring. 1 credit, Letter graded (S/U)
May be repeated for credit.
1 credit,
May be repeated for credit.
HDO 695: Oral Biology and Pathology
Teaching Practicum
Practice instruction in the teaching of oral
biology and pathology at the undergraduate
level carried out under faculty orientation and
supervision.

Spring 2021
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HDO 699: Thesis Research Oral
Biology and Pathology
Dissertation Research, Prerequisite:
Advancement to Candidacy Passing,
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

HIS 502: Introduction to Late Modern
Europe
Field seminar in late modern European history,
1789-1945. Surveys the major historical
problems and interpretations from the French
Revolution through the Second World War.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HIS 516: Theme Seminars on Empire,
Modernity, and Globalization

HDO 704: Translational Oral Biology
May be repeated for credit.
Covers the biochemical, physiological,
microbiological and electronic principles
HIS 517: Theme Seminars on Empire,
involved in a variety of techniques used as aids Modernity, and Globalization
in the diagnosis of oral diseases.
May be repeated for credit.
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HDO 705: Oral Medicine
Introduces the principles of patient care
related to stomatologic and dermatologic
disease, neurologic abnormalities, hematologic
disturbances, and the medically compromised
patient.16 course hours Prerequisites: HDO
701
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HDO 706: Oral Facial Genetics
Focuses on the utilization, preparation and
analysis of basic human genetics in clinical
situations. Covers genetic disorders of the
craniofacial complex and dentistry for the
multiple handicapped patient. 30 course
hours Prerequisite: HD 501 or permission of
instructor
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HDO 805: Summer Research
SUMMER RESEARCH
S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

HIS
History
HIS 500: Historiography
Introduction to historiography through reading
and writing about interpretations of history,
historical methods, and major historians. Term
paper on historian of choice.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HIS 501: Early Modern Europe
Seminar:1450-1789
Field seminar in early modern European
history, 1450-1789. Surveys the major
historical problems and interpretations from
the Renaissance to the coming of the French
Revolution.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

HIS 521: Introduction to United States
History to the Civil War
Field seminar in U.S. history from the
founding of the British colonies to the
beginning of the Civil War. Surveys the major
topics and interpretations. Required for M.A.
students in U.S. history.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HIS 522: Introduction to United States
History Since the Civil War
Field seminar in U.S. history from the Civil
War to the Cold War. Surveys the major
interpretations.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HIS 524: Core Seminar: History, Theory
and Practice
Introduction to the theory, practice and
writing of history through the reading of
theoretical and historical texts and the writing
of a research paper. This course meets over
the entire academic year, for 3 credits per
semester, and is mandatory for all new Ph.D.
students. Students entering with an M.A. take
it at the discretion of their advisor.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HIS 525: Core Seminar: History, Theory
and Practice
Introduction to the theory, practice and
writing of history through the reading of
theoretical and historical texts and the writing
of a research paper. This course meets over
the entire academic year, for 3 credits per
semester, and is mandatory for all new Ph.D.
students. Students entering with an M.A. take
it at the discretion of their advisor.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HIS 526: Core Seminar: History Theory
and Practice
Introduction to the theory, practice and
writing of history through the reading of
124

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
theoretical and historical texts and the writing
of a research paper. This course meets over
the entire academic year, for 3 credits per
semester, and is mandatory for all new Ph.D.
students. Students entering with an M.A. take
it at the discretion of their advisor.

Spring 2021
HIS 542: Modern Latin American
History Seminar
Field seminar in modern Latin American
history. Surveys major historical problems and
debates from the post-independence period to
the present. This course is offered as both CEG
517 and HIS 542.

HIS 555: Theme Seminars on Nation,
State, and Civil Society
May be repeated for credit.

HIS 557: Special Seminars
Topics to be arranged. The seminar is built
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
around actual research activities of students
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
and faculty. The following topics have been
HIS 527: Core Seminar: History, Theory
covered: Cultural Theory; Sociology of
and Practice
HIS 543: Theme Seminars on Gender,
Technology; Micro-sociology; Advanced
Introduction to the theory, practice and
Sexuality, and Reproduction
Topics in Marxist Theory; Sociology of
writing of history through the reading of
Emotions; Historical Methods; Ethnic
May be repeated for credit.
theoretical and historical texts and the writing
Relations; Biosociology; Comparative
of a research paper. This course meets over
Stratification; Max Weber; Sociology of the
HIS 550: Modern Africa
the entire academic year, for 3 credits per
Future; Science of Sociology and Everyday
This course interrogates how historians
semester, and is mandatory for all new Ph.D.
Life; The Study of the World's Advanced
define the modern age through the history
students. Students entering with an M.A. take
Societies; Methods of Behavioral Observation;
of Sub-Saharan Africa from the fifteenth
it at the discretion of their advisor.
century to the present, a period that began with Social Structure; Sociology of the Family;
Cognitive Sociology; Sociology of Work;
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Africa at the center of exchanges in cultural,
Transnational Social Movements; Economic
material, and human commodities. Topics to
HIS 532: Theme Seminar: Gender,
Sociology; War and Revolution; Sociology of
be explored include Trans-Saharan, Atlantic,
Religion and Modernity
Gender; Sociology of Culture; Development
Indian Ocean, and regional cultural and
of Capitalism; Film as a Sociological Research
economic systems, salve trade and abolition,
May be repeated 5 times FOR credit.
the rise of "legitimate commerce," new African Tool; Funding and Grant Writing; The Three
Faces of Social Psychology; A Structural
HIS 535: Theme Seminars on Gender,
mercantile and laboring classes, European
Approach to Organizational Behavior;
Sexuality and Reproduction
conquest and militarization, anti-colonial and
Pan- African movements, and the nation-state Professionals and Professionalism; Sociology
May be repeated for credit.
of Modernity; Globalization and Immigration;
and its problems in post-colonial Africa. The
Research Support in Sociology; Sociology of
course
will
also
pay
attention
to
the
theoretical
HIS 540: The Black Power Movement
Sexual Behavior; Global Sociology; Gender
and
methodological
apparatuses
Africanists
This course examines the Black Power
have used to challenge conventional narratives and the Law; Poverty and Homelessness.
Movement. Stokely Carmichael's call for
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
"Black Power!" broke through the commotion in which African histories are absent or
May be repeated for credit.
seen
as
aberrant.
Topics
will
include
critical
of everyday politics during 1966's Meredith
approaches
to
slavery,
including
Africanist
March Against Fear. Soon after, and for
HIS 562: Modern African History and/or
responses to the idea of slavery as "social
the next decade, Black Power galvanized
Asian History Seminar
death",
fictive
and
other
forms
of
kinship,
African American politics, engendering radical
the
concept
of
"wealth
in
persons,"
gendered
Field seminar in modern African history.
movements for social, political, and cultural
social
identities
and
hierarchies,
the
invention
Surveys major topics such as nationalism,
transformation that impacted blacks in the
and construction of tradition, resistance, and
anticolonial movements, and modernization.
United States and beyond. An emerging
the
colonization
of
consciousness.
Semesters
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
historiography traces the roots of Black Power
Offered: No fixed semester Grading: ABCF
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
in the postwar black freedom movement,
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
finding cultural and political touchstones
HIS 563: Introduction to South Asian
for future Black Power activism among
HIS
552:
Theme
Seminar:
Mass
History
civil rights renegade, trade unionists, and
Media
and
Journalism
in
International
Surveys major topics such as nationalism,
black nationalists. We will examine works
Perspectives
anticolonial movements, legacies of British
produced during the Black Power era and
imperialism, and modernization.
new scholarship to analyze the Black Power
May be repeated for credit.
Movement's legacy in the politics and culture
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
of African Americans. Permission of advisor
HIS 553: Theme Seminars on Nation,
is required. This course is offered as both HIS State and Civil Society
HIS 564: Introduction to Chinese
540 and AFS 540.
History
Topics vary by semester.
Field seminar in modern Chinese history.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
3 credits,
Surveys major historical topics from
Offered Fall and/or Spring, 3 credits, Letter
HIS 541: Introduction to Colonial Latin
modernization to revolution to reform and
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
American History
sociocultural change. For MA, MAT, PhD
May be repeated 3 times FOR credit.
students.
Field seminar in colonial Latin American
history. Surveys major historical problems and HIS 554: Theme Seminars on Nation,
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
debates from the colonial period through the
State, and Civil Society
wars for independence. Required for M.A. in
HIS 565: Introduction to Japanese
May be repeated for credit.
Latin American history.
History
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

125

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Field Seminar in Modern Japanese History
surveys major historical topics from reform
and modernization to imperialism and postwar
reconstruction. For MA, MAT, PhD students.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HIS 570: Theme Seminars in
Environment, Science and Health
Spring
May be repeated for credit.
HIS 571: Theme Seminars in
Environment, Science and Health
Spring
May be repeated for credit.
HIS 572: Theme Seminars in
Environment, Science and Health
Spring

Spring 2021
HIS 587: Teaching Practicum I: Controversies
in American History

HIS 588: Teaching Practicum II:
Controversies in American History
HIS 634: Research Seminars on
Offered Fall every year, 1 credit, Letter graded Gender and Sexuality
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
HIS 652: Research Seminar: Oral
History: Methodology and Theory
HIS 588: Teaching Practicum II:
Topics vary by semester.
American Controversies
HIS 587: Teaching Practicum I: Controversies
in American History

3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated 3 times FOR credit.

HIS 588: Teaching Practicum II:
Controversies in American History
Spring, 2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.

HIS 653: Research Seminars on Nation,
State, and Civil Society

HIS 595: Reading Colloquium in
Women's History
May be repeated for credit.
A topics course dealing with such subjects
as women in social movements, the place of
HIS 581: Supervised Teaching
gender in particular historical circumstances,
Teaching practicum that usually accompanies a imperialism and woman, changing views of
student's assistantship.
sexuality, or relations between family policies
3 credits, S/U grading
and other political programs. This course
May be repeated for credit.
offered as both HIS 595 and WST 595.
HIS 582: Teaching Practicum
Practicum in teaching methods for new
assistants. (MA. Workshop required deleted
from the curriculum)

Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)

3 credits, S/U grading

May be repeated for credit.

HIS 584: Directed Readings for M.A.
Candidates
Specialized tutorials based on contractual
relationship between individual student and
faculty. Required for M.A. students.

HIS 603: Research Seminar on Social
and Cultural History

1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
HIS 585: Directed Readings for M.A.
Candidates
Specialized tutorials based on contractual
relationship between individual student and
faculty. Required for M.A. students.

HIS 601: Research Seminars on Social
and Cultural History

HIS 615: Research Seminars on
Empire, Modernity, and Globalization
HIS 616: Research Seminars on Social
and Cultural History
HIS 617: Research Seminars on
Empire, Modernity, and Globalization

1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

HIS 622: Migration, Diaspora and
Transnationalism

HIS 586: Directed Readings for M.A.
Candidates
Specialized tutorials based on contractual
relationship between individual student and
faculty. Required for M.A. students.

HIS 623: Research Seminars on
Ethnicity and Migration

1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
HIS 587: Teaching Practicum I:
American Controversies

HIS 633: Research Seminars on
Gender and Sexuality

HIS 654: Research Seminars on Nation,
State, and Civil Society
HIS 655: Research Seminars on Nation,
State, and Civil Society
HIS 682: Directed Readings for Ph.D.
Candidates
Specialized tutorials based on contractual
relationship between individual student and
faculty member.
1-18 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
HIS 684: Directed Readings for Ph.D.
Candidates
Specialized tutorials based on contractual
relationship between individual student and
faculty member.
1-18 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
HIS 685: Directed Readings for Ph.D.
Candidates
Specialized tutorials based on contractual
relationship between individual student and
faculty member.
1-9 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
HIS 686: Directed Readings for Ph.D.
Candidates
Specialized tutorials based on contractual
relationship between individual student and
faculty member.
1-18 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

HIS 631: Research Seminar: The Social
History of Medicine and Health
HIS 695: Dissertation Prospectus
Workshop for Ph.D. Candidates
HIS 632: Research Seminars on
Required of all Ph.D. candidates in order to
Gender and Sexuality
prepare a dissertation prospectus. This seminar
should be completed either before or in the
same semester as the qualifying examination.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

126

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Offered once each year, 3 credits, S/U grading
HIS 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Dissertation research under direction of
advisor.
Prerequisite: Advancement to candidacy (G5).
Major portion of research must take place on
SBU campus, at Cold Spring Harbor, or at the
Brookhaven National Lab.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.
HIS 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
HIS 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
in MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.
All international students must received
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
HIS 800: FULL TIME SUMMER RES
May be repeated for credit.

HPD
Population Health and Clinical
Outcomes Research

Spring 2021
This introductory course will provide students
with an understanding of the process used to
perform systematic review, as well as provide
a "hands on" experience. Each student will
perform a systematic review of the literature
for their own pre-defined research question
of interest. As part of the systematic literature
review process, students will learn how to
focus their research question; to search the
literature to identify relevant studies; to
appraise the quality and select studies; and
to summarize studies as well as to synthesize
their results in context of their original
research question raised. To receive a grade
for this course, moreover, a scholarly product
(e.g., manuscript or letter to the editor) must be
submitted to a peer -reviewed journal.
Offered
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HPD 521: Introduction to Clinical
Research
This seminar series course provides a broadbased introduction to the fields of population
health and clinical science research. This
course will prepare participants to become
critical consumers of the peer-reviewed
literature. Class lectures will cover a wide
range of topics, which include: framing a
research question, formulating a research
hypothesis, evaluating the peer-reviewed
literature, exploring study design options,
conducting human subjects' research ethically/
responsibly, selecting clinical outcomes, and
evaluating analytical alternatives. Offered in
Summer, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
HPD 601: Human Subjects: Ethics and
Responsible Conduct of Research
This introductory course incorporates three
components focused upon identifying: 1)
the ethical principles associated with human
subjects research; 2) the primary tenets of
responsible conduct of research; 3) academic
career planning. This course provides a
philosophical basis for current research ethics
practices, identifies outstanding ethical issues
and controversies in clinical and translational
science and research, and provides students
with knowledge and access to resources such
that they may to address the ethical challenges
that may arise most effectively. The course
provides a more in-depth exploration of the
ethics and responsible conduct of clinical
and translational science research that can
supplement current mandated training in the
area. ABCF grading
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

HPD 519: Sytematic Review of the
Literature
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

HPD 605: Introductory Seminar on
Doctoral Studies in Population Health
and Clinical Outcomes
This is an introductory doctoral level 3-credit
seminar for all incoming PhD students in
Population Health and Clinical Outcomes.
This course will help students understand
what earning a PhD entails, opportunities that
exist after earning a PhD, typical PhD-level
work activities, and beginning the process of
academic writing. Students should already be
thinking about what their dissertation will be
about, and we will build off of that throughout
the course.
3 credits, S/U grading
HPD 619: Independent Study
Intensive reading under supervision of one
or more instructors, of material not covered
in the formal curriculum, or execution of a
research project under the supervision of one
or more faculty members. Generally a written
deliverable (e.g. manuscript) will be required.
Instructor consent required.
0-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
HPD 650: Seminar Series: Clinical
Applications of Molecular Medicine
This course will provide an overview of the
field of molecular medicine, with a focus on
cutting edge technologies related to the current
and future clinical applications to improve
early detection, to enhance diagnostic testing,
to monitor treatments, and to counsel patients
on their prognosis. As applied to clinical
patient care questions, the specific molecular
medicine topics discussed will include: DNA,
RNA, proteomics, and chromosome assays.
Pending the specific lecturers and topics
coordinated, students will be introduced to a
broad range of biomarkers for disease such
as cancer, pulmonary/heart diseases, autism,
and immune-related disease challenges.
An emphasis will be placed in this course
on learning how molecular markers can
be applied in a clinical setting to augment
the patient and provider decision-making
process. (NOTE: Students should have an
introductory knowledge of cellular and
molecular development biology. ABCF
Grading
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HPD 664: Clinical Trials
This course introduces the design, conduct,
and analysis of clinical trials. Topics include
types of clinical trials, study design, treatment
allocation, randomization and stratification,
quality control, sample size requirements,
patient consent, and interpretation of results.
127

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
physical living conditions, individual
characteristics, social support, etc) and health.
HPD 665: Clinical Outcomes Research Students will review and critically examine the
current literature on the social determinants of
This course will provide an overview of
population health with the goal of identifying
the field of clinical outcomes assessment.
gaps in this literature which may be filled by
The specific topics covered include: risk
future research. Concepts relating to the social
factors identification, clinical outcomes
determinants of health - e.g., identification of
selection, risk adjustment methods, patient
safety monitoring, and provider-based quality current priority areas, theoretical frameworks
improvement performance reporting. Students and perspectives, intervention, research
methodology, etc, will be addressed as each
will be introduced to a broad range of clinical
comes up in the context of the reviewed
outcomes including (but not limited to) shortjournal article. Using publicly available data
term mortality, treatment-related morbidity,
health-related quality of life, condition-specific sets, students will choose a research topic
related to an identified gap in the current
metrics, patient satisfaction, health plan
research on the social determinants of health,
member satisfaction, utility theory, and costpropose a project to examine this topic or need
effectiveness analysis. An emphasis will be
placed in this course is placed on learning how which can be accomplished using publicly
clinical outcomes research can provide a data- available data sets, conduct the analysis and
driven approach to influence patient, provider, write up their project in a format suitable for
submission for publication. Offered
program, and policy decisions.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
etc.)
HPD 673: Longitudinal Data Analysis
HPD 682: Statistical Methods in
This course covers the theory and application
Clinical Outcomes Research
of univariate and multivariable techniques
The purpose of the course is to familiarize
appropriate for longitudinal data. Students
will be exposed to both theory and application students with some major topics in clinical
outcomes research, the statistical models
addressing repeated measures challenges.
commonly employed, and statistical problems
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
that need to be overcome. Specific topics of
interest may include: risk factor analysis;
HPD 674: Statistical Methods in
Clinical Outcomes and Health Services static models; risk factor/disease progression
analysis;dynamic models; survival analysis
Research
(including multivariable survival analysis);
Clinical outcomes research frequently
volume-outcomes research; and forecasting
involves the analysis of nonexperimental
models. Statistical techniques and challenges
retrospective databases. Such databases pose
will be discussed within the context of each
a number of statistical challenges, due to
research topic as they arise. By the end of this
their nonexperimental design and various
course, students should be broadly familiar
data limitations. This course will review
with these issues, and should be able to
and discuss multivariate methods in clinical
outcomes research, focusing on specific issues evaluate published clinical outcomes research
in terms of the appropriateness of models
involved in building and interpreting these
models. These issues include causal inference, chosen and how well the statistical problems
have been addresses, and the reliability of the
selection bias, measurement error, missing
results. Prerequisites: HPH 507 Biostatistics II
data problems, multicollinearity, and serial
or equivalent course. ABCF Grading
correlation. Clinical outcomes and health
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
services research studies will be reviewed
and discussed to illustrate these statistical
HPD 685: Research in Population
issues and how they have been addressed in
health and Clinical Science.
published research. Students will be asked to
This course will introduce students to health
review and evaluate clinical outcomes and
services and clinical outcomes research
health services research papers, and present
methods and applications of these approaches.
their reviews for discussion in class.
The course will begin with an overview of key
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
statistical methods, outcomes measurement
issues, and methods for assessing the economic
HPD 681: Advanced Social
value of clinical treatments. The second
Determinants of Health
part of the course will consider specific
This course will build on the prior HPH 523
applications of health services and clinical
and further examine the current evidence
outcomes research from a review and critique
supporting an association between social
of published studies. Students will present
determinants (e.g., socioeconomic status,
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Spring 2021
and critique these studies together with the
instructor. Specific areas of applications
will include: Estimating the Production
of Health Hospital Volume and Clinical
Outcomes Estimating Clinical Outcomes
with Patient-Level Data Racial and Ethnic
Disparities and Medical Treatments Electronic
Medical Records and Clinical Outcomes Cost
Effectiveness Applications
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HPD 686: Mentored Research Project
in Population Health and Clinical
Outcomes Research
Supervised research experience.
0-9 credits,
May be repeated for credit.
HPD 687: Advanced Research Seminar
The main purpose of this course is to
familiarize students with empirical research
methods via presentation and critiques of
published research and work in progress. By
presenting and discussing actual research
that employs various statistical and other
research methods, students will deepen
their understanding of research intent and
design, methodology and technique, format
and presentation, and data management
and analysis. This will reinforce their
understanding of these methods learned in
previous coursework.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
HPD 692: Practicum in Teaching I
In this course, students will have the
opportunity to examine, and plan for, the
teaching component of the professor role.
We will use a combination of strategies
including lectures, discussions, small group
activities, and interviews of exceptional
teachers and departmental chairs to explore
philosophical and practical issues related to
course preparation, delivery, and evaluation.
At the completion of the course, students
will have a teaching portfolio that will have
two basic components: a detailed set of plans
for a specific course and a statement of their
teaching philosophy. This will be an intensive
hands on course that will require supportive
and cooperative behaviors by all.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
HPD 693: Practicum in Teaching II
The course is a supervised teaching experience
with the Master of Public Health program.
3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.

128

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
HPD 694: Grant Writing
This course will assist students in synthesizing
basic public health knowledge through
completion of a grant writing experience.
Students will be introduced to the process of
writing grant proposals, developing budgets,
professional networking, publishing in the
scientific literature, and planning for their
future careers as public health professionals
and academics. Students will also present their
own individual research projects, write their
own grant proposal, and do a career mapping
exercise.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HPD 699: Dissertation Research On
Campus
This course is normally taken by advanced
PhD students when they conduct research
towards their theses. Only PhD students who
have been advanced to candidacy (G5 status)
can take this course. Students who have the
G3 and G4 status and participate in a research
project with their advisor can register for HPD
619 Independent Study. Prerequisite: Must be
advanced to candidacy (G5); permission of
instructor S/U grading, may be repeated for
credit
0-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

HPH
Public Health

Spring 2021
report. Topics include how to identify a
research question and, correspondingly, how
to formulate a clear, concise hypothesis or
set of hypotheses; reasons and procedures
for reviewing the literature; overview of
observational and interventional research
designs; review of measurement theory, types
of scales, and commonly used measures in
public health-related research; data collection
methods including survey and qualitative
methods; and the ethical conduct of research.
Through the introduction of these topics, the
course provides a general background for
individuals who are interested in learning the
fundamentals of how to prepare a research
proposal. Prerequisite: Admission to Graduate
Public Health Program or Department
Consent.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HPH 506: Biostatistics I
This is the first of a sequence of two-semester
courses with the aim to provide students
and researchers in public health with an
introduction to the principles of public health
informatics and statistical methods with
their application in biomedical and public
health research. The course will provide
necessary knowledge and skills to perform
various data management tasks to create
and manage data sets using SAS with basic
proficiency. The course will also introduce
summarizing and exploring data, probability
theory, discrete and continuous probability
distributions, populations and samples,
sampling distributions and statistical inference,
hypothesis testing, one-sample and two-sample
comparisons.

international comparisons. The topics include
the organization and financing of health
care systems, access to health care including
health insurance, regulation and policy issues,
and the health care workforce. Prerequisite:
Admission to Graduate Public Health Program
or Department Consent
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HPH 514: Epidemiology for Public
Health
This course presents basic epidemiologic
concepts used to study health and disease
in populations. It provides an overview of
the major causes of morbidity and mortality,
including methods of measurement (e.g.,
incidence, prevalence). Observational and
experimental epidemiologic studies will
be described and their advantages and
disadvantages compared. The course aims for
students to begin developing the skills needed
to evaluate data, interpret reports, design, and
conduct studies. Students will be introduced
to the various areas of epidemiologic
studies, including cancer, molecular/genetic,
environmental, occupational, social and
behavioral, and infectious disease surveillance.
The course comprises both lectures and small
group seminars for in-depth discussions of
previously assigned topics. Prerequisites:
Admission to Graduate Public Health Program
or Department Consent; HPH 506.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

HPH 516: Environmental and
Occupational Health
HPH 500: Contemporary Issues in
This course is designed to provide the
Public Health
fundamentals of environmental and
This course provides an introduction to the
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
occupational health and to educate students
field of public health that aims to develop
on issues related to major environmental
HPH 507: Biostatistics II
an appreciation of the unique and important
and occupational concerns. It will provide a
mission of public health; an understanding of
"This is the second of the two-semester courses forum for the discussion of local and national
the history, values, ethics, mission, and goals
intended to provide students and researchers
environmental and occupational public health
of public health; and knowledge about how
in public health with an introduction to the
issues. The content of the course will focus
public health functions today including the
principles of public health informatics and
on major pollutants, their detection, impact
organization, financing, policies, and practices statistical methods and their application in
on health, and principles of remediation.
of public health. Students will be expected to
biomedical and public health research. The
Using various teaching techniques, students
think critically about whether public health has course will provide necessary knowledge and
will be exposed to current environmental
achieved its mission in today's world and how skills to perform various data management
and occupational topics and approaches to
the profession might develop in the future.
tasks to create and manage data sets using
prevention and treatment. The course will
Prerequisite: Admission to Graduate Public
SAS with intermediate proficiency. The course emphasize the most recent research in the
Health Program or Department Consent.
builds upon the foundations of its prerequisite, field. Prerequisite: Admission to Graduate
Biostatistics I, with progressively more
Public Health Program or Department Consent
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
advanced instruction in analysis of variance,
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HPH 501: Introduction to the Research association and correlation, linear regression,
and logistic regression. Prerequisite: HPH 506 HPH 519: Independent Study
Process
This course provides an overview of the
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Intensive reading, under supervision of one
research process including formulation of a
or more instructors, of material not covered
HPH 508: Health Care Systems
research problem, conceptualization of the
in the formal curriculum, or execution of
research design, construction of the instrument This course introduces students to the
a research project under the supervision of
for data collection, selection of a sample,
system that we have developed to deliver
one or more faculty members. Permission
collection of data, and writing a research
health care in the United States, with
of MPH Academic Coordinator is required.
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

129

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Prerequisite: Admission to Graduate Public
Health Program or Department Consent
0-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 5 times FOR credit.
HPH 521: Introduction to Clinical
Research
This introductory seminar series provides
a broad-based overview of clinical science
research methods, as well as guidance for
critically reviewing the peer-reviewed
literature. Class lectures, exercises, and
interactive small group sessions will cover
framing a research question, formulating a
research hypothesis, critically appraising the
literature, exploring study design options,
conducting research ethically and responsibly,
selecting clinical outcomes, and evaluating
analytical alternatives. Students enrolled in the
Master of Public Health degree program can
not use this course (earn credit) to their degree
requirements.
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 3 times FOR credit.
HPH 523: Social and Behavioral
Determinants of Health
This course introduces students to population
health as one of the organizing concepts
in public health and the orientation that
differentiates public health from medicine.
Consistent with public health tradition, health
is discussed from an ecological perspective,
and the course presents current knowledge
about the multiple determinants of population
health including socioeconomic status,
the physical environment, medical care,
individual behavior, and genetics and the
interaction of these factors. Also covered
is the measurement of population health,
sources of data and methods for assessing
population health improvements. Prerequisite:
Admission to Graduate Public Health Program
or Department Consent
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HPH 525: Evaluating Programs and
Policies to Improve Health
This course introduces students to health
policy analysis and public health program
evaluation, two distinct fields that share
similar tools, albeit with different goals
in mind and approaches to meet these
goals. Specifically, this course (1) draws on
economics, epidemiology, political science,
and biostatistics to prepare students to conduct
holistic analyses of health policy issues;
(2) prepares students to plan a program
evaluation; and (3) prepares students to
evaluate public policy options. Prerequisite:
Admission to Graduate Public Health Program
or Department Consent

Spring 2021
Consideration of space-time variability
will also be covered. This course includes
HPH 527: Health Economics and Policy theoretical elements so that the student will
learn to appreciate strengths and weaknesses
This course will provide students with a
of different spatial approaches.Prior course in
comprehensive view of the reasons behind
GIS or equivalent, as determined by consent
the rapid rise in medical expenditures in
from the instructor required. Students need
the United States over nearly four decades,
a foundational knowledge of Geographic
and the measures that have been proposed
Information Systems (GIS) software. This
to address this problem. This course will
requirement can be met by completing
cover the following topics: the demand and
GSS 313: GIS Design and Application I (if
supply of medical care; the dynamics of
available), by completing other Introduction
competition in the health care industry; the
to GIS courses at Stony Brook or elsewhere,
role of government in medical care; general
or by self-teaching using the following book:
understanding of health care institutions,
Getting to Know ArcGIS Desktop by Tim
including Medicare, Medicaid, managed
Ormsby, Eileen Napoleon, and Robert Burke.
care, hospital and physician behavior, and
Prerequisite: Admission to Graduate Public
pharmaceutical markets; and health care
Health Program or Department Consent
reform. Prerequisite: Admission to Graduate
Public Health Program or Department Consent 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HPH 529: Fundamentals of Healthcare
Management
This course provides students with an
overview of concepts and issues related
to healthcare leadership. Through the
examination of management topics and
healthcare situations, the student will
explore the skills and knowledge needed
to be successful in a diverse healthcare
environment. Topics include healthcare
leadership, organizational design as it relates
to the uniqueness of healthcare organizations,
managing professionals, and supervisory to
mid-level management. It is designed for the
Health Policy and Management concentration
but is open to all MPH students. Prerequisite:
Admission to Graduate Public Health Program
or Department Consent.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HPH 534: Spatial Analysis: Health
Applications
This course is an intermediate level graduate
course in the application of spatial methods
for analyzing environmental exposure and
disease data. Students with backgrounds in
epidemiology, public health, environmental
health, biostatistics, community health,
biology, sociology, psychology, marine
and atmospheric sciences, geosciences,
demography, and geography are particularly
encouraged to participate. Although the course
will focus on examples related to human
health, graduate students in other disciplines
will find the course useful for specific and
appropriately defined research purposes.
Techniques for spatially analyzing point
patterns and aggregated data in polygons
will be introduced, including autocorrelation,
clustering analysis, geostatistical smoothing,
and approaches for spatial regression.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

HPH 535: Clinical and Community
Preventive Medicine
This course prepares residents to transition
from the role of learners to practitioners
of preventive medicine. Didactic lectures
emphasize clinical preventive medicine,
which entails mastering the science of
preventive medicine practice, grounded in the
evidence-based clinical preventive services
guidelines as developed by the United States
Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
[i.e. screenings, behavioral counseling, and
chemoprophylaxis/preventive medications],
while case-based simulated sessions provide
an opportunity to become skilled in the art of
preventive medicine practice, built upon the
principles of lifestyle medicine, motivational
intervention, brief action planning and other
evidence-based strategies for health behavior
change. The work of the preventive medicine
physician in public health, referred to as
community preventive medicine or community
medicine, is also covered in this course,
including the Community Preventive Services
(CPSTF) guidelines, to help prepare residents
for the medical practice of prevention in
the public health domain. The role of the
preventive medicine physician in the seamless
integration and effective collaboration
between clinical medicine and public health is
emphasized where appropriate. Prerequisite:
Admission to Graduate Public Health Program
or Department Consent
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HPH 542: Introduction to Global Health
This course will provide an introduction to the
field of global health and challenge students
to think about how a global perspective could
enhance their future practice. The course is
designed for MD and MPH students, and
is open to students from related graduate
130

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
programs with instructor permission. This
course will explore core concepts in global
health, including its definition and origin;
how to measure the global burden of disease;
recent progress and current challenges; social
inequalities in health; health systems; and
global stakeholders. It will also apply such
concepts to major global health topics, with
lectures focused on such areas as HIV/AIDS,
child health and immunization, chronic disease
epidemiology and sexual violence.

Spring 2021
will learn about and critique theories that
are less-commonly used (such as new and
emerging theories in the literature) and have
important implications for future research,
practice, and further theory development
and testing among populations. Prerequisite:
Admission to Graduate Public Health Program
or Department Consent

Health Program or Department Consent; HPH
550.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

HPH 553: Advanced Evaluation of
Community Health Initiatives
This course prepares students to plan,
implement, and utilize an evaluation of a
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
community health initiative. Basic principles
and practices of evaluation are addressed,
HPH 551: Practice of Health
including identifying the goals of a community
Communications
2 credits, S/F graded
health initiative; designing an evaluation plan
This course provides an overview of health
that can determine if the initiative's goals
HPH 549: Public Health Law
communication. The course will introduce
are achieved; implementing an evaluation
This course is a survey of legal and policy
theories concerning health communication, and plan; interacting with stakeholders; and using
issues that have special relevance for public
build on such to provide practical approaches
evaluation results to improve performance.
health professionals. Topics may vary, but
to interpersonal and organizational health
Prerequisite: Admission to Graduate Public
typically will include many of the following:
communication, risk communication, and
Health Program or Department Consent; HPH
structure of the U.S. legal system; power
media campaigns. Students will learn to
525
of state governments in matters affecting
collect, organize, and convey information
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
health care; governmental power and the
effectively to different audiences important
right to privacy; constitutional issues in social to public health initiatives. Throughout,
HPH 554: Principles of Health
welfare benefits; governmental regulation of
the course will emphasize how health
Education & Promotion
health care providers and payers; the scope
literacy and cultural beliefs influence
This course aims to provide students with
and discretion of administrative agencies in
effective communication, and students will
the historical, theoretical, and philosophical
health care; the antitrust laws; the fraud and
be challenged to develop communication
foundations of health education and
abuse laws; and negligence in the delivery
tools (e.g., social marketing campaigns,
promotion. Students will be given the tools to
and financing of health care. Prerequisite:
presentations, op-eds) optimized for a
work with community and patient populations.
Admission to Graduate Public Health Program. specific population. Prerequisite: Admission
Students will be equipped with the knowledge,
to Graduate Public Health Program or
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
skills, and attitudes to raise people's health
Department Consent
awareness, as a well as the tools needed
HPH 550: Theories of Health Behavior
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
to teach people how to reduce their risk of
and Communication
disease and promote health. All students will
HPH 552: Planning and Implementing
In this survey theory course, students learn
be required to design a health education and
Community Health Initiatives
about the major health behavior and health
promotion program using the knowledge
communication theories that are used in
In this course, students learn how to develop
and skills learned in the course. Prerequisite:
population health research and practice. Rather theoretically-informed and evidence-based
Admission to Graduate Public Health Program
than simply cataloguing each theory in turn,
community health initiatives. Over the course
or Department Consent
this course takes a constant, comparative,
of the semester, students work on developing
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
approach to the learning of theories, in which
their own culturally-competent community
theories are dissected to their core elements
health initiatives, each of which is targeted
HPH 555: Global Health and
and compared to each other in order to
at a particular population with a specific
Demography
understand the points of convergence and
health need. Each student learns how to assess This course introduces students to the basic
divergence among them. The goal in taking
community needs and assets using a variety
theory and methods employed in the study of
this comparative approach is application: by
of methods, elaborate an initiative's theory
demography and global health. This course
knowing the core elements of various theories, of change through use of logic model, design
will provide an introduction to the field of
students will more easily be able to choose
theoretically-informed intervention activities
global health and challenge students to think
appropriate theories to explain population
appropriate to the needs/assets identified,
about how a global perspective could impact
health problems of interest and consider the
create a budget and organizational structure,
their future public health practice. The students
design of interventions that are appropriate
and engage key stakeholders at every facet
will also learn about sources of demographic
to achieve improvements in the educational,
of development and implementation of the
data, patterns in global fertility and mortality,
behavioral and environmental factors that
community health initiative. Students work
and the demographic transition. Prerequisite:
may contribute to the problem. In addition to
together in the same small group over the
Admission to Graduate Public Health Program
covering traditional individual-level behavior
course of the semester to get/give feedback
or Department Consent
change and health communication theories,
and hone their individual projects. Through
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
this course will focus on social change and
this intense group work, students both (1)
systems theories, challenging students to think learn how to apply course concepts to several
HPH 559: Advanced Research Methods
about the role of social context and systems
particular community health problems and (2)
on health behavior and health communication gain skills for working in teams on community This course will provide students with an into achieve population health improvements.
health initiative planning and implementation. depth review of principles of public health
research methods. Emphasis will be placed
Finally, after learning about commonly-used
Prerequisite: Admission to Graduate Public
on conceptualization of research questions,
theories in the field of public health, students
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

131

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
evaluation of research design, sample size, and
issues related to potential threats to validity
within a public/applied setting. Additionally,
students will become familiar with how to
evaluate methods used in published literature
and to design their own research projects.
Course topics will include how to obtain
secondary data, sample size calculation, risk
adjustment, bias, confounding, and interaction.
The instructor will work with students as they
develop their own analytic project proposals.
Students will be expected to implement their
proposed research in HPH 560 Advanced
Biostatistics in the following semester.
Prerequisite: Admission to Graduate Public
Health Program or Department Consent; HPH
507 and HPH 501

Spring 2021
aimed at developing hands-on skills for the
management and analysis of health data
using SPSS and other relevant statistical
software programs, such as Open Meta
Analyst (OMA) and the System for the
Unified Management, Assessment and Review
of Information (SUMARI). Prerequisite:
Admission to Graduate Public Health Program
or Department Consent; HPH 501 and HPH
506

weekly journal of activities, as well as a paper
at the conclusion of the course, applying
program knowledge to the internship activities.
Graduate Graded and may be repeated for
credit. MPH Academic Coordinator consent
required. Prerequisite: Admission to Graduate
Public Health Program and Department
Consent
0-12 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

HPH 564: Qualitative Methods
In this course, students learn about the logic,
theory, and methods of qualitative research
within population health and related fields
(e.g., social welfare, nursing, medicine,
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
sociology, and psychology). The course begins
with an introduction to the epistemological
HPH 560: Applied Biostatistics
and ontological underpinnings of qualitative
Students learn to formulate a scientific
inquiry, with special attention to how these
question in terms of a statistical model, leading factors affect the types of research questions
to objective and quantitative answers. Topics
often asked (and answered) by qualitative
may include analysis of variance, regression,
researchers. Students then learn the nutsincluding details of data-analytic techniques
and-bolts of qualitative research design and
and implications for study design, measures of data collection through review of existing
association, 2x2 tables, stratification, matched qualitative studies and hands-on application.
pairs, logistic regression, model building,
Homework and in-class exercises over the
analysis of rates, and survival data analysis
course of the semester give students practice
using proportional hazards models. The
in (a) designing a feasible qualitative research
course stresses applications in epidemiology,
study, and (b) collecting three kinds of
and other areas of public health research.
qualitative data: participant observation,
Prerequisite: Admission to Graduate Public
in-depth interviews, and focus groups. The
Health Program or Department Consent; HPH course concludes with an overview of steps
507 and HPH 559.
for data analysis, including coding, memowriting, and triangulation. Emphasized
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
throughout the course are methodological
issues germane to qualitative (and quantitative)
HPH 562: Population Health Analytics
research: reflexivity of the researcher,
The Population Health Analytics course
appropriate treatment of human subjects,
provides students with the methodological
and obtaining quality data. Prerequisite:
and analytical skills required for competent
Admission to Graduate Public Health Program
evidence-based decision-making regarding
or Department Consent; HPH 501
population health improvement projects.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Beginning with a review of current methods
and an introduction to emerging methods
HPH 566: Clinical Trials
for the generation and analysis of health
data, such as precision medicine/¿big
This course introduces the design, conduct,
data¿, telemedicine/¿digital health¿, and
and analysis of clinical trials. Topics will
spatial analysis/¿hotspotting¿, the course
include types of clinical trials, study design,
covers the major elements required for
treatment allocation, randomization and
the evidence-based pursuit of population
stratification, quality control, sample
health goals. In particular, hands-on
size requirements, patient consent, and
training is provided on how to synthesize
interpretation of results.
evidence, via comprehensive systematic
2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
review methodologies, in the following 4
aspects of evidence-based decision-making:
HPH 575: Public Health Internship
effectiveness, efficiency, feasibility, and
This course is an applied internship in a public,
appropriateness/meaningfulness. In addition,
not-for-profit, or private sector organization
students will learn how to retrieve and
that provides a public health service. Students
summarize information about population
will gain practical public health skills though
health from major public health information
a semester long internship. The student will
systems in the U.S. Lectures and labs are
work in the organization and prepares a
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

HPH 580: Practicum
The Practicum is a planned experience in a
supervised and evaluated public health-related
practice setting. A journal of fieldwork and
a project, with a written report, are required.
Students will be expected to demonstrate
their "capacity to organize, analyze, interpret
and communicate knowledge in an applied
manner." Health departments, as well as a
variety of other local organizations, offer a
wide array of potential sites for the Practicum
experience.Permission of MPH Academic
Coordinator is required. Prerequisite:
Admission to Graduate Public Health Program
and Department Consent
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HPH 581: Capstone
This course will assist students in synthesizing
basic public health knowledge through
completion of several competency-driven
learning experiences. Most core and
concentration course work must be completed
before the student can participate in Capstone.
Students will be introduced to the process
of writing grant proposals and developing
budgets, professional networking with nonacademic community partners, publishing
in the scientific literature; communicating
practice-based projects in both oral and
poster presentation formats, and planning
for their future careers as public health
professionals. They will self-assess their
own conflict styles and apply negotiation
and mediation skills to address community
and/or organizational challenges, and reflect
on their conflict styles when considering
case studies. Students will also engage
in inter-professional education learning
activities to improve their understanding
and communication of their roles, values/
ethics, and how to work effectively as part
of an inter-professional team. Students will
apply systems thinking to a case study to
create a logic model that demonstrates the
complex systems involved in a population
health issue. Lastly, they will present their
own work as part of their Practicum to fellow
students, and discuss career plans. Permission
of MPH Academic Coordinator is required.

132

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Prerequisite: Admission to Graduate Public
Health Program and Department Consent
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HPH 585: Introduction to Biostatistics
& Epidemiology
This online course is an introduction to
biostatistics and epidemiology. In the first half
of the course students will be introduced to
the principles and methods of epidemiology.
The second half focuses on the statistical
methods used throughout the health sciences.
At the end of the course students will be able
to interpret epidemiological studies and have a
basic understanding of the statistical methods
these studies employ.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HPH 590: Research Practicum
The goal of Research Practicum is to mentor
students to successfully complete their
research requirements. Expectations are that
students will register for Research Practicum
for three consecutive semesters. The Research
Practicum is a planned experience with
expectations identified each semester in
conjunction with a research mentor and faculty
supervisor. A practicum proposal, analysis
report, and final deliverable (NIH proposal,
Foundation proposal, or peer reviewed
publication) are required.

Spring 2021
beginning of the Fall term. Students graded S/
U. (0.5 credit, G1 status. Co requisite HWC
509)

Placement in practice settings under
supervision of a licensed M.S.W. Students will
be graded S/F. Corequisite: HWC 513.

S/U grading

4-6 credits, S/F graded

HWC 596B: Community Learning and
Professional Preparation Year I Part B
This second part of a required two-part course
will provide foundational knowledge, values
and skills to prepare the student as a social
work professional. Topics covered in this
course include professional pathways, areas of
practice, advocacy and communication skills,
and other topics specific to the students' social
work education. Attendance is required at two
full-day events at the Stony Brook campus
per academic year. Dates will be posted at the
beginning of the Fall term. Students graded S/
U. (0.5 credit, G1 status. Co requisite HWC
509)

HWC 501: Field Education II
A continuation of HWC 500. Students will
be graded S/F. Corequisite: HWC 514.
Prerequisites: HWC 500 and 513.

S/U grading

HWC 597A: Community Learning and
Professional Preparation Year II Part A
This first part of a required two-part course
will provide advanced knowledge, values and
skills to prepare the student as a Social Worker
for entry into the profession. Topics covered
in this course include professional pathways,
licensure, advanced advocacy and professional
communication skills, and other topics specific
to the students' social work specialization.
0-9 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Attendance is required at two full-day events
May be repeated for credit.
at the Stony Brook campus per academic
HPH 599: Maintenance of Matriculation year. Dates will be posted at the beginning
This course is for students who are maintaining of the Fall term. Students graded S/U. (0.5
credit, G2 status. Co requisite depending on
matriculation while engaging in consultation
specialization- HWC 534 (for FYT) or HWC
with faculty regarding completion of courses
and/or master's project. Students will be graded 564 (for IH) or HWC 570 (for CPSA)
S/U grading
S/F.Prerequisite: Admission to Graduate
Public Health Program and Department
HWC 597B: Community Learning and
Consent
Professional Preparation Year II Part B
0-3 credits, S/F graded
This second part of a required two-part course
May be repeated for credit.
will provide advanced knowledge, values and
skills to prepare the student as a Social Worker
for entry into the profession. Topics covered
in this course include professional pathways,
Social Work
licensure, advanced advocacy and professional
communication skills, and other topics specific
HWC 596A: Community Learning and
to the students' social work specialization.
Professional Preparation Year I Part A
Attendance is required at two full-day events
This first part of a required two-part course
at the Stony Brook campus per academic
will provide foundational knowledge, values
year. Dates will be posted at the beginning
and skills to prepare the student as a social
of the Fall term. Students graded S/U. (0.5
work professional. Topics covered in this
credit, G2 status. Co requisite depending on
course include professional pathways, areas of specialization- HWC 534 (for FYT) or HWC
practice, advocacy and communication skills,
564 (for IH) or HWC 570 (for CPSA)
and other topics specific to the students' social S/U grading
work education. Attendance is required at two
full-day events at the Stony Brook campus
HWC 500: Field Education I
per academic year. Dates will be posted at the

HWC

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

4-6 credits, S/F graded
HWC 502: Field Education III
Placement in advanced social work practice
settings. Supervision provided by a licensed
M.S.W. Students will be graded S/F.
Corequisite depending on specialization- HWC
531 (for FYT) or HWC 564 (for IH) or HWC
570 (for CPPSA). Prerequisites: HWC 500,
501, 513 and 514
4-6 credits, S/F graded
HWC 503: Field Education IV
A continuation of HWC 502. Students will
be graded S/F. Corequisite depending on
specialization- HWC 571 (CPPSA), HWC 532
(FYT), HWC 565 (IH). Prerequisites: HWC
502
4-6 credits, S/F graded
HWC 504: Human Behavior and
the Social Environment: Critical
Applications of Social Work Theory
This course applies a multi-theoretical
and critical approach to social inquiry
in the examination of complex theories,
metaperspectives, and knowledge about
individuals, families, groups, organizations,
institutions and urban, suburban, and rural
communities. The course encourages
students to maintain a view of people and
their environments as heterogeneous and
sociohistorically embedded, as well as
adaptable and resilient. Throughout the course,
special consideration is given to social and
cultural diversity. Students will develop a
multi-dimensional (e.g., social, psychological
and cultural) understanding of human behavior
as applied to contemporary issues in social
work practice. Class meets two hours inclass and one hour of instructor directed
assignments.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 505: Integrating Seminar
This course extends the work covered in
HBSE, by applying human behavior theory
to social work practice situations. Students
will integrate knowledge and skills acquired
in social work practice, social justice, policy,
field education and research courses to social
and clinical issues across diverse topics. Class
133

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
activities include experiential assignments and
project based learning. This course prepares
students to practice in interdisciplinary
environments. Class meets two hours inclass and one hour of instructor directed
assignments. Prerequisite: HWC 504

Spring 2021
process that are common to all methodologies:
the ethical conduct of research; literature
searches and reviews; development of research
questions and hypotheses; measurement;
and sampling procedures. Quantitative data
analysis is introduced in the form of univariate/
descriptive statistics. Class meets two hours
in-class and one hour of instructor directed
assignments.

ethical practice and skill development.
Corequisite: HWC 501. Class meets two hours
in-class and one hour of instructor directed
assignments. Prerequisites: HWC 500 and 513
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

HWC 519: Psychopathology and
Psychopharmacology
HWC 509: Foundations of Social
This course focuses on the concepts of mental
Justice: Challenging Oppression
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
health, mental disorders and the influence of
This course explores the meaning of social
culture on both. The mental health concerns
justice within the context of political economy, HWC 512: Research II
of diverse social, racial and ethnic groups,
human nature, and health policy. Examination Research II is the second part of a twoparticularly those historically devalued and
will include the relation of historical
semester course sequence designed to prepare oppressed are covered. In addition, the use
implications within contemporary discourse.
social work students to engage in research
and misuse of the classification system of
This course will analyze the foundations of
informed social work practice and practice
the Diagnostic Statistical Manual (DSMIV)
power, privilege, and prejudice in the United
informed social work research and evaluation. are examined. This examination includes the
States through the lens of social work ethos
The second semester (HWC512) follows-up on distinction between major mental disorders
that values human rights, equality, respect, and the first by examining specific data collection
and other forms of dysfunctional behavior
health for all. Emphasis will be placed on the
methods (experiments; surveys; interviews;
and the recognition of symptoms. Assessment
identification of social injustice, challenging
focus groups; ethnographies; etc.), with
of psychosocial functioning within a multiinstitutional oppression, and the creation of
attention given to understanding how these
cultural and gender role frame is emphasized.
effective methods to empower marginalized
methods are used appropriately in social work Social work values, roles, responsibilities and
and oppressed populations. Class meets two
research and evaluation processes. Quantitative ethical considerations are detailed throughout
hours in-class and one hour of instructor
data analysis procedures at the bivariate
the course. The role of the social worker as
directed assignments. Corequisite: HWC
and multivariate levels (t-tests; ANOVA;
an integral member of the interdisciplinary
596A.
correlation; regression; chi-square test, etc.),
mental health team is discussed. Class meets
hypothesis
testing,
inferential
statistics,
and
two hours in-class and one hour of instructor
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
computer assisted data analysis using SPSS
directed assignments. Prerequisites: HWC 500,
will be presented in the context of appropriate 501, 504, and 513.
HWC 510: Social Policy and Social
data collection methods. Emphasis placed on
Determinants
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
research proposal development and critical
This course builds upon the Foundations
evaluation of research reports. Class meets
HWC 520: Advanced Social Work
of Social Justice: Challenging Oppression
Practice with the Aged
course through the discussion and exploration two hours in-class and one hour of instructor
directed assignments. Prerequisite: HWC 511
of social policies, social determinants of
This course examines concepts and strategies
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
health, and contemporary & historical social
for working with the elderly at the primary,
movements that have arisen to challenge
secondary and tertiary levels of intervention.
HWC 513: Social Work Practice I
oppression. This course utilizes frameworks
It presents and critically analyzes a variety
for social policy analysis while addressing
Provides a foundation for generalist practice,
of approaches in working with the elderly
continuing dilemmas in policy development.
including the knowledge base, values and
and their families. Interventions with the well
Experiential learning and beyond-theskill development necessary for ethical
elderly living in the community, the elderly
classroom experiences introduce students
and effective practice with individuals,
who suffer some disabilities but who are still
to the processes and dynamics of social
families, groups and communities. Students
living in the community and the elderly who
movements, social change, and their effects
are introduced to the helping process across
are institutionalized are examined. Class meets
on social policy. Class meets two hours inclient systems and across the life span through two hours in-class and one hour of instructor
class and one hour of instructor directed
a strengths perspective and empowerment
directed assignments. Advanced Practice
assignments. Prerequisite: HWC 509
approach to practice. Evidence-based shortElective.
term
therapies
are
used
to
guide
direct
practice
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
to address resilience and human development.
Class meets two hours in-class and one hour of HWC 521: Ethnic Sensitive Social Work
HWC 511: Research I
instructor directed assignments. Corequisite:
Practice
Research I, is the first part of a two-semester
HWC
500.
course sequence designed to prepare social
Provides a theoretical framework and focuses
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
work students to engage in research informed
on the development of the skills necessary to
social work practice and practice informed
provide effective culturally sensitive social
HWC 514: Social Work Practice II
social work research and evaluation. The first
work services to diverse individuals, families,
semester (HWC511) provides an overview of
A continuation of HWC 513. Revisits the
groups and communities. The special problems
the research process from both quantitative
helping process in greater depth with specific
faced by groups traditionally devalued and
and qualitative perspectives and examines how reference to special consideration for work
oppressed are examined. Emphasizes skills
a critical approach to research may form the
with families, groups, communities and
in working for institutional change and social
basis of evidence-based social work practice
organizations. The broad range of social work justice. Class meets two hours in-class and
and client empowerment. The course goes
roles across client systems is considered.
one additional hour of instructor directed
on to examine those elements of the research
Deepens knowledge of generalist practice,
assignments.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

134

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

HWC 522: Human Sexuality
This course identifies personal attitudes and
judgments about sexually related behaviors.
Critically examines factual information
derived from research in human sexuality
and covers a wide range of sexual behavior
from a knowledge base. Class meets two hours
in-class and one hour of instructor directed
assignments. Advanced Practice Elective.

HWC 526: Crisis Intervention:
Opportunities for Change
This course provides theoretical and
substantive content that will enable students
to gain knowledge, understanding, and skill
in relation to crisis intervention in social work
practice. This course defines crisis, provides
examples of the types of crises workers will
face in various fields of practice, explores
the role of the social worker, and the range
of interventions needed in response to crisis
situations. Class meets two hours in-class and
one hour of instructor directed assignments.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 523: Growing Old in America:
The Social Conditions-Policy and
Practice Implications
Explores the social, political and economic
conditions related to aging including longterm care in this society. Identifies social
policies and program formats that enhance
wellness and support dependencies from a
positive perspective. Class meets two hours
in-class and one hour of instructor directed
assignments.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 524: Children and Adolescents
Who Grieve
Focuses on issues related to bereavement
in children and young people. Children and
adolescents who struggle with the crisis
of loss is a special population that is often
overlooked. Students explore the emotional
response of young people who grieve. Mental
health professionals that provide treatment
to this population must acquire specialized
knowledge and skills to assist in healing
wounded children. Upon completion, students
will have gained an increased understanding
of the developmental implications of loss in
childhood, assessment of bereavement, and
treatment interventions specific to bereaved
children and adolescents. Class meets two
hours in-class and one hour of instructor
directed assignments.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 527: Social Work in the Political
Process: Campaign School
Limited to 20 second-year students. Instructor
consent is required. The purpose of the course
is to advance students' understanding of the
political process and to expand students'
repertoire of skills for participation in the
political process. A prime focus is deepening
students' commitment to engaging in the
political process as a significant form of
social work practice for social change. This
is a hybrid course combining online content,
in-class participation as well as required
attendance at a 2-day Campaign School
workshop at the University of Connecticut's
School of Social Work in West Hartford. 3
credits
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

HWC 529: Complementary and
Alternative Medicine
Human service workers are often required
to discuss issues of health and healing.
Many individuals, by virtue of their culture,
experiences and/or choice, often adhere to a
combination of nontraditional and traditional
beliefs regarding healthcare. This course
familiarizes students with those methods and
beliefs most often found in specific cultures.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Students will develop an appreciation of
each practice in order to interact with clients
HWC 525: Anger Management
from a strengths perspective and will gain
This course presents an overview of concepts
of anger management within a holistic context. an international perspective on healthcare
modalities. Class meets two hours in-class and
Students learn how to recognize external
one hour of instructor directed assignments.
manifestations of anger in themselves,
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
clients, organizations and communities.
Anger management strategies that can be
HWC 530: Case Management in Human
taught to clients as part of an intervention
Services
plan will be introduced. Environmental and
societal factors as "igniting events" of anger in Case management has grown dramatically in
individuals, families, groups and communities the human service field over the last twenty
are examined. Class meets two hours inyears in response to the growing service needs
class and one hour of instructor directed
of individuals and families facing complex
assignments.
life situations and issues. Examines both the
macro level and micro level issues facing case
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

managers and agencies as they provide quality
services to often oppressed populations. Class
meets two hours in-class and one hour of
instructor directed assignments.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 531: Advanced Practice Skills I:
Developmental Processes
This course emphasizes the understanding
of developmental theories and application to
culturally responsive practice with families,
youth, and young adults. Focus is placed on
recognizing developmental issues and their
implications for assessment, engagement, and
early intervention strategies. Familial, cultural,
and environmental factors that influence
development are discussed. Corequisite: HWC
502 and 534. 3 credits, Fall semester.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
HWC 532: Family, Youth, and
Transition to Adulthood Advanced
Practice Skills II: Intervention Skills
Building on the knowledge and skills in
Advanced Practice Skills I, this course
focuses on enhancing clinical effectiveness in
interactions with children, adolescents, and
young adults by strengthening assessment
and diagnostic skills and understanding
related advanced theory. Topics include child
welfare related interviewing skills, parenting
and communication, advanced solutionfocused therapy, motivational interviewing,
cognitive behavioral therapy, behavioral health
assessment and interventions, rapid assessment
tools, and forensic therapeutic interventions.
All of these topics are addressed within a
trauma- and culturally-responsive framework.
Professional and ethical considerations,
evaluation of intervention effectiveness, and
service delivery in an agency context are
woven throughout the course. Corequisite:
HWC 503 and 535. 3 credits, Spring semester.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
HWC 533: Family Intervention in Health
and Mental Health
This course focuses on family and marital
problems. Environmental, social, economic,
psychological and institutional pressures
that affect family functioning are examined.
Emphasis is placed on intervention skills.
Class meets two hours in-class and one hour
of instructor directed assignments. Advanced
Practice Elective.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 534: Advanced Policy Practice

135

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
This course surveys historical and current
policies relevant to social work practice with
families, youth, and young adults. Students
will engage in policy analysis including a
critical analysis of oppression and inequality in
the context of child and family federal policies.
In addition, the course will explore culturally
sensitive skill development and competencies
related to policy practice including social
action and activism. Corequisite: HWC 502
and 531. 3 credits, Fall semester.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
HWC 535: Org Ldrship Across FYT
Systems of Care
This course provides an evidence-based and
empirically supported practice framework for
developing advanced organizational leadership
skills across various systems of care that
impact the lives of youth, families, and young
adults. Focus is placed on strategic planning,
effective communication, anti-oppressive
organizational development and evaluation,
and organizational analysis including interand intra-organizational contexts.3 credits,
Spring Semester
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
HWC 538: Death and Dying; Loss and
Separation
This course explores student values, attitudes,
fears and conceptions relating to death and
dying. Issues of loss and separation in relation
to various age groups, cultural orientations
and societal expectations are examined. The
focus is on the acquisition of bereavement
counseling skills. Class meets two hours
in-class and one hour of instructor directed
assignments. Advanced Practice Elective.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring 2021
focused therapies. Emphasis will be placed
on understanding the acute issues facing
individuals with disabilities primarily from
a social model lens which focuses on socioenvironmental constraints and barriers. These
include limited human rights, access to care
and treatment choices, and socio-cultural
forces. Psychosocial factors will also be
explored. The empirical knowledge base that
informs and guides the assessment and theory
based interventions of individuals with
disabilities will be examined and critiqued.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 541: Youth and Violence
Examines the etiology of youth at risk for
violence, using ecological and interpersonal
perspectives. Family, school and community
risk factors are outlined as well as assessment,
intervention and treatment issues. Successful
prevention programs are highlighted. Class
meets two hours in-class and one hour of
instructor directed assignments.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 542: School Social Work:
Practice Policy and Research
Examines the practice of school social work
in an in depth manner. It gives an overview
of the central issues that occur in schools. It
discusses strategies to build a positive and safe
school climate for diverse and disenfranchised
populations. The course will cover evidencedbased practices including DBT and CBT for
schools. It examines the social/political context
of working in the school. Topics will also
include working with students struggling with
psychiatric, psychological, substance use, and
familial issues as well as assisting students
in special education. Crisis intervention
techniques and trauma-informed educational
practices will be discussed.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

HWC 539: Ancestral Health Practices
There is an increasing integration of
complementary medicine and allopathic
medicine. As health professionals, it is
important to understand the beliefs and
practices of our clients in order to maximize
their options and choices. Professionals must
be knowledgeable about the healing traditions
anchored in different cultures and ethnicity.
Class meets two hours in-class and one hour of
instructor directed assignments.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 540: Therapeutic Approaches for
People with Disabilities
This course will provide a framework for
practice with individuals with disabilities
based on cognitive-behavioral and solution-

HWC 544: Overview of Substance
Abuse
This course is an examination of the history
and development of alcohol and substance
abuse problems in the United States. It focuses
on the etiology, psychopharmacology and
ethical and legal ramifications of the use of
licit and illicit substances in our culture. The
course provides information on a variety of
services available to drug abusers, addicted
individuals and their families in the fields of
prevention, education and treatment. Class
meets two hours in-class and one hour of
instructor directed assignments.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

HWC 545: Individual, Group and Family
Treatment of Alcoholics and Substance
Abusers
This course covers alcoholism and substance
abuse as family illnesses and their stages
of development, as well as the impact these
illnesses have on the families of active and
recovering alcoholics and substance abusers.
Ethical dilemmas and treatment modalities
including Self-help groups and on traditional
and relatively recent modalities used in the
treatment of addicted individuals and their
families are focused on. Class meets two hours
in-class and one hour of instructor directed
assignments. Advanced Practice Elective.
(Manhattan)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 546: Working with Adult Children
of Alcoholics and Substance Abusers
This course focuses on adult children of
alcoholic parents and how parents' illness
affects their children's social, emotional, and
educational development from infancy to
adulthood and into old age. Survival roles
of children in alcoholic families and how
these affect adult functioning are discussed.
Examines ethical issues and the continuing
effect family alcoholism has on adult children
and the intervention strategies used in
treatment. Class meets two hours in-class and
one hour of instructor directed assignments.
Advanced Practice Elective.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 547: Managing Conflict: Groups,
Organizations, and Communities (FYT)
(CPPSA)
A major concern for health and human
service managers is conflict in organization,
community and group settings. The various
types of conflicts and the concepts of
negotiation and mediation as interventive
strategies are considered. Didactic and
experiential learning experiences are utilized.
Focus is on analyzing conflict situations
and selecting interventive strategies to
reduce, contain or heighten the conflict
situation. Oppressive conditions, structures and
processes are considered major determinants
of human suffering and individual and social
problems; students examine how these
oppressive conditions are present in conflict
situations and consider ways of dealing with
them. Class meets two hours in-class and
one hour of instructor directed assignments.
Advanced Practice Elective.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 548: Adolescent Development
and Health Promotion
136

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
The effect on adolescent development of
physiological changes, relationships with
peers and family, and societal expectations are
examined. Emphasis is on the development
of assessment and engagement skills for
working with adolescents and their families
to help counteract adolescent self-destructive
behavior and promote well-being. Class meets
two hours in-class and one hour of instructor
directed assignments. Advanced Practice
Elective.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 549: Overview of Social Work
with Special Populations
This course examines the issues that social
workers must consider when working with
traditionally disenfranchised populations.
Emphasis will include micro and macro
issues when intervening with gay and lesbian
individuals, members of diverse racial
and ethnic groups, and women, as well as
others. The historic as well as contemporary
experiences of these individuals' interactions
with the health and human service delivery
system will be explored. Class meets two
hours in-class and one hour of instructor
directed assignments.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 550: Culture-Centered Approach
to Social Work Practice
This course provides students with an
opportunity for self growth while preparing to
work with individuals and their families from
a culture-centered value base. Culture-centered
foundation practice provides students with a
frame of reference for better understanding
and appreciation of the difference of their own
culture from the cultures of others. Class meets
two hours in-class and one hour of instructor
directed assignments. Advanced Practice
Elective.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 551: Law and Social Change
This course introduces students to the
interrelationship of the legal process in the
United States and the profession of social
work. Focuses on the legal process in general,
social welfare law, in particular, and the
implications for effective social work practice.
Students will be required to explore and
integrate the ways in which legal frameworks
determine the nature of practice processes
and structures within their chosen field of
Specialization. Permission required for
students not enrolled in the School of Social
Welfare.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring 2021
HWC 552: Lesbians and Gay Men:
Issues in Health Care
This course is an examination of the critical
impact that healthcare policies and services
have on lesbians and gay men in American
society. Issues related to access to care,
discrimination, services, health insurance,
healthcare resources within geographical
areas and the health status of lesbians and gay
men are examined. It focuses on the issues
that lesbians and gay men encounter in their
interactions with the healthcare system.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 553: Chemical Dependency in
Special Populations
This course covers alcoholism and substance
abuse with populations that have been
traditionally devalued and oppressed.
It focuses on development of skills and
sensitivity to ethical issues and the needs
of ethnic groups, women, the elderly, the
mentally ill and LBGTQ people who are
chemically dependent. Policy and practice
issues related to these populations are
considered. Class meets two hours in-class and
one hour of instructor directed assignments.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 555: Supervision in Health and
Human Service Organizations
This course prepares social workers for
the variety of tasks related to supervisory
practice in health care agencies. Supervision
is introduced as a teaching process, as an
administrative function and as a program
development tool. Emphasis is on helping
workers function effectively with culturally
diverse clients, populations at risk and the
chronically ill. Content includes: historical
perspective of supervisory practice; supervisor
and agency structure; the organizational
context of practice; learning theories; concepts
of power, authority and accountability; ethical
and clinical issues; supervisory techniques,
skill and self awareness; staff and program
development and evaluation. Advanced
Practice Elective.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 556: Proposal Writing in the
Health and Human Service Fields
This course provides a comprehensive study
of the principles and methods used to prepare
program, training, research, demonstration and
other types of proposals. Extensive workshop
practice in developing appropriate writing
skills and in locating and accessing funding
sources is included. Advanced Practice
Elective.

HWC 558: Human Services
Administration
An introduction to the practice of
administration of public and non-profit
agencies, theories of management including
alternative decision-making models,
understanding of organizational structure
and process, external and internal functions
including interagency collaboration and
personnel and financial management,
affirmative action and ethical issues. The
course combines theory with case examples,
practical exercises and other experiential
learning modes. Advanced Practice Elective.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 559: Mental Health EvidenceBased Practice
This course develops the knowledge and skills
necessary for working with individuals with
a diagnosis of serious mental illness using
recovery-oriented evidence-based practices.
This course is designed for M.S.W. students
and M.S.W. mental health practitioners. The
course familiarizes students with evidencebased practices, within a recovery-oriented
paradigm, as a general approach to practice as
well as specific evidence-based interventions
to use for individuals with a diagnosis of
serious mental illness. Students should have
a basic knowledge of serious mental illness
as pre- or co-requisite, however a review
will be provided. Research literature is
examined to determine the various levels of
support for specific interventions and essential
principles for translating research into practice.
Appropriate treatment outcomes that reflect
effective quality mental health practice are
identified. Focus is on providing assessment
and treatment to a diverse group of individuals
with a diagnosis of serious mental illness. 3
credits
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 561: Implications of Racism for
Social Welfare
This course examines personal and
institutional racism in the United States
and the effect racism has on the delivery of
services to individuals who do not fit the
traditional "American model". It examines
the historical relationship between racism and
social welfare policies, programs and practice,
and contemporary strategies for change. Class
meets two hours in-class and one hour of
instructor directed assignments.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 563: Homelessness, Politics and
Public Health

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

137

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
This course analyzes homelessness as an
issue of social policy, including its history,
recent causes and current demographics. It
emphasizes the political and economic context
that has made homelessness a major social
problem. Class meets two hours in-class and
one hour of instructor directed assignments.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 564: Advanced Practice I:
Assessment and Skills in Integrated
Health
This course will build advanced competencies
as applied in health and mental health
settings. Students will learn how to conduct
assessments that engage the family and
the community, and develop skills for
relationship building, care coordination,
and strategies for defining and addressing
the social determinants of health, utilizing
interprofessional practice skills. Topics include
primary prevention; acute and long term
care; rehabilitation in inpatient and outpatient
clinics; forensic social work; substance abuse;
medically managed systems; chronic disease;
HIV/AIDS; trauma and co-morbid psychiatric
issues; cancer. Corequisite: HWC 502 and 574.
3 credits Fall semester
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
HWC 565: Advanced Practice II:
Strategies and Interventions in
Integrated Health
Building on the knowledge and skills in
Advanced Practice I, students will learn
current practice strategies, technological
advancements, and interventions to address
the major health concerns that impact society.
Students will investigate population based
treatments across systems that are trauma
responsive, build on client's strengths, and
that are culturally congruent. Corequisite:
HWC 503 and 576. Prerequisite: HWC 564. 3
credits, Spring Semester
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
HWC 566: Student-Community
Development Student Portfolio Project
Provides an opportunity for students to create a
portfolio composed of various components that
integrates the student's educational experiences
and achievements in the Student-Community
Development Specialization. Components may
include literature reviews, abstracting research
articles, analysis of field placements, and
integration of social work and student affairs
literature. Class meets two hours in-class and
one hour of instructor directed assignments.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring 2021
HWC 568: The Workings of the Brain:
Practice Issues for Social Workers
Addresses the organization, development and
functions of the brain and how this influences
how we think, feel and behave. Causes of
organic changes in the brain such as substance
abuse, disease and injury are addressed.
Advances in neuroscience that have aided
in diagnosis and social work practice are
covered. Innovative treatment modalities
such as EMDR, biofeedback and vagal nerve
implants are presented. Strongly emphasizes
the combination of science and practice issues.
Class meets two hours in-class and one hour
of instructor directed assignments. Advanced
Practice Elective.

Building on the knowledge and skills in the
first semester of Advanced Tools for Social
Change, Part II focuses on developing students'
skills in analyzing issues, developing powerful
arguments and communicating persuasively
with multiple audiences using multiple
media platforms. Using a lens of critical
theories, students will learn to engage with and
mobilize constituents, form coalitions, lobby
policymakers and leverage political power to
challenge systemic structures of power and
privilege and effect positive social change in
the areas of students' passion. Corequisite:
HWC 503 and 573. 3 credits, Spring Semester
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

HWC 572: Leadership for Social
Change
Leadership is widely understood as a critical
success factor for advancing social change.
In this class, students are educated to develop
advanced leadership skills to create and sustain
social-change organizations that address
societal inequities. The course covers the
many facets of social change leadership,
including effective communication, strategic
planning, and program development. The
course will consider what it means to be
a leader, the kinds of skills leaders need
to succeed in diverse community settings,
and what are the necessary preconditions
for social change. Additional focus will
be on anti-oppressive organizational and
program development, management, resource
development and financial management.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Specific focus will be devoted to providing
HWC 570: Advanced Tools for Change: students with opportunities to develop their
presentation and analysis skills and to receive
Practice I
peer feedback. Corequisite: HWC 502 and
Building on foundation knowledge, values
570. 3 Credits, Fall Semester
and skills, this course will deepen student
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
capacity to work for social change. Students
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
will build their expertise using interpersonal
communication, relationship building,
HWC 573: Social and Political Change
organizing skills in select areas such as
(Hybrid)
visioning, problem analysis, community
By its nature, social and political change
engagement, assessment, action research
is action oriented. This course will provide
and mobilizing communities to work for
change. This course expands upon the students' students with the opportunity and value,
knowledge and skill based guidance to
learning in their first year policy courses to
undertake an actual advocacy/community
utilize advanced critical theories to analyze
change oriented capstone project. Students
social problems and develop tools for social
change with a special emphasis on community will work with community based social
and empowerment. Corequisite: HWC 502 and change organizations on a social change
project for approximately 35 hours during
572. 3 credits, Fall Semester
the semester in lieu of classroom meetings.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
During the 5 in-class meetings and online
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
discussions, students will act as consultants
HWC 571: Advanced Tools for Change: to one another, reflecting on learning from
project work, readings and other courses in the
Practice II
specialization. Corequisite: HWC 503 and 571.
3 credits, Spring Semester
HWC 569: Childhood Sexual Abuse
and Long-Term Sequelae: Assessment
and Intervention
Introduces students to the incidence and
prevalence of childhood sexual abuse as a
national problem. Covered are definition
issues, sequelae during childhood, family
constellation and adult sequelae. Addressed are
assessment and current treatment modalities,
particularly for families and offenders, as
well as ethical and legal dilemmas and the
subsequent health related difficulties of this
childhood trauma. Special attention is paid to
the cultural dynamics in sexual abuse. Students
are expected to develop an awareness of and
critically analyze current research. Focus is on
examination of policy issues and legislation.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

138

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

This course explores the principles and
practice of group work in assisting clients to
maximize psychosocial functioning. Class
HWC 574: Clinical Skills: Motivational
members will participate in an experience
Interviewing & Cognitive Behavioral
that encourages them to realize the power of
Therapy in Integrated Health
group work process and usefulness of this
modality. Group work techniques, context,
This course introduces students to advanced
evidence-based clinical modalities, that include dynamics, skills and the role of the group
facilitator are discussed. In presenting group
group treatment, and short term interventions
with an emphasis on Motivational Interviewing work with special populations students
(MI) and Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) learn about the impact of issues including
development, discrimination, illness, addiction
as applied in health and mental health care
and separation on the commonality of the
settings. Corequisite: HWC 502 and 564. 3
human experience as it presents in group
credits, Spring semester
practice. 3 credits
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.

HWC 575: Child Welfare: An Overview
This course covers the impact of historical and
contemporary developments within the field
of child welfare. It examines the evaluation of
child welfare services and the role of child care
workers. It also examines out-of-home care,
foster care, group home care and institutional
care within the context of traditional public/
voluntary structure of services and the social/
political context. Services in relation to the
changing roles of the family and emergence of
child care are covered. Class meets two hours
in-class and one hour of instructor directed
assignments.

HWC 579: Special Topics in Social
Work
These courses examine significant timely
issues confronting the profession. Topics
include violence as a public health problem,
issues of aging, racism, gender, AIDS, the
media, and others. Topics vary each term as
faculty develop specific modules that address
one or more of these issues. Class meets
two hours in-class and one hour of instructor
directed assignments.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 4 times FOR credit.

HWC 581: Public Health and
Community Health Intervention
HWC 576: Integrated Health: Advanced This course examines many of the critical
Health Policy Systems
public health issues of today. Students
gain an understanding of the concepts
The course will address local, federal, state,
underlying social epidemiology and develop
and organizational policies and funding
an appreciation of the ways in which the health
mechanisms impacting health and mental
status of different populations in this country
health. Topics include recent developments
is differentially impacted. Community health
in health care reform and current issues
planning strategies (e.g. health promotion and
and trends in primary and behavioral health
health education) are examined. 3 credits
care integration. The course will emphasize
diversity, health disparities, and social and
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
economic justice. Corequisite: HWC 503 and
565. 3 credits, Fall semester
HWC 582: Organizational Dynamics
and Legal and Ethical Issues in Health
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Care
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
This course examines some of the traditional,
HWC 577: Program Evaluation
as well as newer, models through which
healthcare services are delivered. Particular
This course provides an in-depth analysis
emphasis is given to the issue of access
of the technical requirements of program
evaluation and the organizational and political to health services as well as the location
of the professional social worker within
constraints that influence the evaluation
these systems. Students gain the ability to
process. Techniques in the design and
conceptualize many of the critical ethical and
implementation of evaluation research in the
legal issues impacting the field today. Class
health and human services fields are covered.
meets two hours in-class and one hour of
Prerequisites: HWC 511 and 512. 3 credits
instructor directed assignments. Advanced
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Practice Elective.
HWC 578: Advanced Social Work with 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Groups
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

HWC 584: Community Analysis and
Health Promotion
Explores diverse concepts of community,
analyzes a range of community structures,
processes and power relationships. Investigates
contemporary models, strategies and tactics of
community organizing and health promotion
in the United States and in selected other
countries and emphasizes efforts made by
poor people, ethnic minorities of color and
women to organize and mobilize community
groups and movements. Highlights group and
community analysis and organization skills.
Class meets two hours in-class and one hour
of instructor directed assignments. Advanced
Practice Elective.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 587: Social Work Practice with
the Military and Military Families
This course focuses on the specific challenges
of those who serve in the military and the
response of social work practitioners to those
challenges. The course will explore the nature
of war, its impact on those who are wounded
- physically and mentally -- and the impact
of the military experience on them and their
loved ones/caregivers. Particular emphasis
will detail the impact of recent wars in Iraq
and Afghanistan on returning veterans, many
suffering with PTSD, Traumatic Brain Injury
and substance abuse problems. Additional
areas of exploration include the challenges
faced by women in the military, the wounded,
those who contemplate suicide. Intervention
strategies and case material will enhance
student understanding. 3 credits, Fall Semester
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
HWC 588: The Dynamics of Trauma
This course will examine the complexity and
range of traumatic events. For example, the
way temperament, genetic pre-disposition and
environment impact traumatic reactions; as
well as the physiological and psychological
reactions that individuals experience.
Throughout this course we will examine
therapeutic interventions with different
populations (children, adults, groups, elders)
as they recover from trauma experiences. This
course will cover the range of psychological
models that comprise trauma theory and
examine the protective factors that mediate
post-traumatic growth. Throughout this course
we will examine cultural, legal, judicial and
policy issues that impact trauma treatments.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 589: Therapeutic Interventions
for Trauma
139

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
This course will examine therapeutic
interventions with different populations
(children, adults, groups, elders) as they
recover from trauma experiences. This course
will appraise the range of psychological
models that comprise trauma theory and
examine the promotive factors that mediate
Post-traumatic Growth. Throughout this course
we will examine cultural, legal, judicial and
policy issues that impact trauma treatment.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 590: Overview of Family Violence
This advanced elective provides an overview
of family violence in the United States
including child abuse, intimate partner
violence (IPV), and elder abuse. The course
covers the etiology of each form of family
violence, current evidence-based treatment
modalities, and mental health and judicial
approaches to these issues. Current research
for each type of family violence and social
policies will also be covered.

Spring 2021
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 593: Social Work in Higher
Education: Wrap-around Care Services
This course reviews the care coordination
involved in the many college student support
services offered across various departments
including offices of disability support services,
counseling and health centers, athletics,
student affairs, and campus and residential life.
An understanding of the transition from high
school to college service systems, transition
to adult health care services, as well as how
different higher education involved systems
function on- and off-campus will also be
discussed. Leadership development and social
work practice roles to promote student success
in higher education settings are emphasized.

procedures used in social research. Discusses
procedures such as descriptive statistics, chisquare, and t-tests, while examining their
relevancy for analyzing issues in social work
practice. Fall Term.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 601: Statistics II
Introduces students to multivariate techniques
used in the analysis of various kinds of data.
Analysis of Variance, Multiple Regression
Analysis, Logistic Regression Analysis, and
Log-Linear Regression Analysis, as well
as more advanced techniques, such as path
analysis and survival analysis, are discussed.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

HWC 602: Research Methods I
Presents an overview of the variety of
research methodologies utilized in social
HWC 594: Continuation of Field Work
science and social work, with the goal of
Experience
providing students with the knowledge
Continuation of placement in practice settings and competencies needed to develop and
under supervision of a licensed M.S.W.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
conduct their own research. The course will
lead to a sophisticated understanding of the
S/F graded
HWC 591: SW in Higher Ed: Prac in
research process including the formulation of
College & Univ
HWC 595: Independent Study
research questions, hypothesis development
Through an interdisciplinary approach,
and testing, and choice of research method,
Independent study with an individual faculty
which draws from social work strengths
involving both quantitative and qualitative
member. Designation as enrichment or
and empowerment perspectives, student
methods. Material on quantitative designs will
advanced practice elective is determined with
affairs perspectives, and college student
include experimental and quasi-experimental
faculty sponsor.
development theories, this course emphasizes
designs, data collection methodologies,
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
how community on the college campus
scaling, instrument development, and sampling
May be repeated 3 times FOR credit.
is influenced and shaped. Historical
procedures. Material on qualitative designs
developments in higher education and student HWC 598: Social Work Issues in Higher will address focus groups interviews, key
development as well as the impact of societal
informant interviews, participant observation,
Education
issues are introduced. This course will follow
unobtrusive observation, text and content
This is an advanced practice elective course
a student-community development lens
that introduces how political, socio-economic, analysis, and the use of archival and historical
and discuss a variety of important topics
data. Special attention is given to ethical and
cultural, and health issues impact higher
in higher education including: overview of
education. This course prepares social workers political issues in the conduct of research.
major policies and programming, campus
to practice in college settings and with diverse 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
safety, campus climate and inclusion, social
student populations. Social issues on college
determinants, financial aid, relationships, and
HWC 603: Research Methods II
campuses are emphasized including mental
mental health.
A continuation of HWC 602 Research
health, identity development, diversity and
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
inclusion, leadership development, community Methods I.
organization, and social work practice roles in 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 592: Social Work in Education:
college settings.
Therapeutic Interventons
HWC 604: Naturalistic and Qualitative
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
This course reviews a wide-range of clinical
Research
practice methods using a trauma-informed
HWC 599: Maintenance of
Considered is the application of alternative
lens that are relevant to high school and higher Matriculation
research methods for different questions. The
education settings including crisis intervention, For students who are maintaining matriculation distinction between quantitative and qualitative
rapid assessment tools, biopsychosocial, and
approaches and methods in the analysis of
while engaging in consultation with faculty
review of wellness and prevention services.
qualitative data is explored.
regarding completion of courses and/or the
Students are encouraged to critically examine
Master's Project. Students will be graded S/F.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
components of contemporary education and
1
credit,
S/F
graded
to devise appropriate intervention strategies
HWC 606: Research Practicum I
May be repeated 6 times FOR credit.
to accomplish the development of studentStudents undertake significant and
centered services, implement tele-mental
HWC 600: Statistics I
methodologically rigorous research involving
health services, and a sense of community
design, implementation, analysis, and
Provides
instruction
in
the
computation,
within education settings.
interpretation, and application of data analytic dissemination of a research project. The
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

140

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
substantive areas will include health, mental
health, or substance abuse. School of
Social Welfare faculty, affiliated faculty
members from the Health Sciences Center and
University social science departments, and
principal investigators in community research
projects will serve as preceptors. Students
will spend ten hours each week for two
semesters in a practicum setting. Students have
a supervised hands-on, practical experience
with an ongoing research project. Typical
activities include data analysis, interpretation
of results, research report writing, subject
recruitment and screening, instrument
development, or data collection. The primary
objective is to strengthen students' ability to
synthesize various phases and components
of social research. A focus is on articulating
linkages among the research questions, the
data gathered to address these questions, the
techniques selected for manipulating and
analyzing the data, and the interpretation of
findings. Students are encouraged to pursue
publication stemming from the practicum.
While the research practicum may not
necessarily expose students to the specific
population or problem of greatest interest to
them, the skills or competencies mastered can
prepare students methodologically to carry out
their dissertation research plans.
3 credits, S/U grading
HWC 607: Research Practicum II
A continuation of HWC 606 Research
Practicum I.
3 credits, S/U grading
HWC 608: Social Welfare Policy
Analysis I
An analytical approach to public policy
formulation in the areas of health, mental
health, and substance abuse involving
the impact of environmental forces on
policy content. Considered are the effects
of various institutional arrangements and
political processes as well as inquiry into the
consequences of various contemporary public
policies. Tools and frameworks of policy
analysis are examined. Policy alternatives and
policy development and implementation are
also considered.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 609: Social Welfare Policy
Analysis II
A continuation of HWC 608 Social Welfare
Policy Analysis I. Prerequisite: HWC 608.
Spring
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
HWC 610: Organizational Theory and
Social Welfare Administration

Spring 2021
HWC 614: Teaching Practicum
The teaching practicum is a supervised
experience in teaching at the master's
or undergraduate level in the School
of Social Welfare, or in some aspect of
academic administration, such as curriculum
development, project planning, and/or proposal
development. The educational practicum is
typically available to doctoral students in
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
the third year. An individualized plan will
HWC 611: Knowledge Building in
be developed for implementing the teaching
Social Work: The Philosophy of Applied practicum. Practica may include teaching a
Social Research
section of a required graduate/undergraduate
course, working as a teaching assistant with
An examination of the major currents of
a faculty member, and/or co-teaching and
thought that shape the meta-theoretical,
working with the curriculum committees and
theoretical, and methodological issues related
area sequences in curriculum development.
to knowledge building in social work. The
impact of pragmatic philosophy on the current Spring
"science versus non-science" debate within
3 credits, S/U grading
social work is reviewed. Special attention is
given to epistemological approaches and their HWC 615: Dissertation Seminar I
relation to qualitative and quantitative research Students are expected to survey the current
strategies. Fall
state of the art in their area of interest
and to develop a written prospectus on a
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
question suitable for dissertation research.
HWC 612: Social Science Theory for
In the second semester, students will refine
Social Welfare
dissertation proposals through presentation and
critique in the seminar. Specific techniques
In this course, we explore the nature of social
and alternatives in studying a variety of
theory and the normative project of social
welfare by examining theories of social justice, dissertation questions are compared.
human rights and oppression. We consider
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
the nature and structure of power, the role
of ideology and their impact in a society
HWC 616: Dissertation Seminar II
defined by inequality. Social Construction
A continuation of HWC 615 Dissertation
and critical theory are particularly relevant
Seminar I.
as their assumptions align well with those of
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
social welfare. Lastly, we explore the tensions
and possibilities of democratic theories and
HWC 679: Special Topics in Policy
ideals, given the current context, as a means
Research
to further social welfares normative project.
Discusses timely policy research issues
Throughout the course, students are challenged
such as violence as a public health problem,
to explore existing theory and, importantly, to
aging, racism, gender, AIDS, poverty and
learn and engage in the process of theorizing,
international social work. Topics vary each
themselves.
term as faculty develop specific modules that
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
address one or more of these topics. Offered
The focus is on theories and methods available
to planners and administrators who function
in complex organizational settings. Decision
making, political and economic factors,
information systems, value conflicts, and
adaptations of rational models to emerging
realities will be studied. Health and mental
health programs will be utilized as exemplars.

HWC 613: Seminar in Social Work
Education
Focus is on the place of social work education
in the university with attention to issues of
current concern such as the integration of
professional education with the scholarly
research focus of other academic disciplines.
Consideration will be given to educational
program structure, content, curriculum
development, evaluation, and teaching
methodologies. Students will be required
to teach a course in the B.S.W. or M.S.W.
curriculum under mentorship of a senior
faculty member.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
HWC 695: Independent Study
HWC 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Dissertation research under direction of
advisor.
Prerequisite: Advancement to candidacy (G5).
Major portion of research must take place on
SBU campus, at Cold Spring Harbor, or at the
Brookhaven National Lab.
Fall, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
141

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
HWC 700: Dissertation Research Off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
HWC 701: Dissertation Research Off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
in MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.
All international students must receive
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
HWC 800: Full Time SUMMER
RESEARCH
F T SUMMER RESEARCH
S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

IAP
International Academic
Programs
IAP 599: Research
Supervised research course for students
enrolled in foreign universities to fulfill the
educational objectives for his or her current
degree program at his or her home institution.
Research proposals must be prepared by
the student and submitted for approval by
the supervising faculty before the semester
and beginning of the credit period. Midpoint
and final evaluation reports are required. An
account of the work and the results achieved is
submitted to the supervisor before the end of

Spring 2021
the credit period. May be repeated. Department optimizing schedules. Graphical approaches to
Consent Required.
project definition are addressed, as are needs
analysis, preliminary design, and detailed
1-8 credits, S/U grading
design and implementation. Human aspects of
project management include forming a project
team, managing performance, and resolving
conflicts.

IDC

Inter-University Doctoral
Consortium

IDC 600: Inter-University Doctoral
Consortium
May be repeated for credit.

ISE
Information Systems
ISE 503: Data Management
This course provides an understanding of
the issues in managing database systems
as an essential organizational resource.
Students learn the enterprise data architecture
components, data storage configurations, and
information retrieval methods. It expands from
the relational model to the multidimensional
model, object-relational techniques, and web
accessed data. The course includes concepts,
principles, issues, and techniques for managing
corporate data resources. Techniques for
managing the design and development of
large database systems including logical
data models, concurrent processing, data
distribution, database administration, data
warehousing, data cleansing, and data mining.
Students will use current methods and tools for
database design and development. Limited to
CSE/ISE graduate students; others, permission
of instructor.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ISE 506: Quantitative Computer
Architecure
Explores the physical structure of a computer;
machine representation of information;
architecture and organization of various
mainframe, mini-, and microcomputers;
primary and secondary storage; and input and
output communication. Architectural choices
are compared and used to determine resulting
function and performance. Architectural tradeoffs are also identified.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ISE 507: Project Management
The course focuses on both the technical
aspects of project management as well as the
human aspects. Technical components include
project definition, work breakdown structure
development, and the use of optimization
techniques for planning a project and

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

ITL
Italian
ITL 500: Reading Italian
Designed to prepare graduate students
to read contemporary research in their
respective disciplines published in Italian, the
course presents systematic instruction in the
fundamentals of reading comprehension and in
specialized subject-oriented vocabulary.
Fall or Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
ITL 501: Contemporary Italy
Analysis of contemporary Italy and its
civilization through the study of the
development of its historical, cultural,
political, and social characteristics. Designed
for potential teachers of Italian at the college
as well as secondary school levels, this course
emphasizes and traces the evolution of the
character and institutions of contemporary
Italy.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ITL 502: Special Topics in Italian
Cinema
A topics course given in Italian on Italian
cinema. Topics may include films of a
particular actor, director, genre, theme, or
historical period. Smeester supplements to
the Bulletin contain specific description when
course is offered. May be repeated for credit as
topic changes. Prerequisite: advanced oral and
written proficiency in Italian.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ITL 507: Italian Linguistics: Diachronic
Development and Synchronic
Structures
An examination of the linguistic evolution
and the synchronic grammars (phonology,
morphology, syntax) of standard Italian and
some Italo-Romance dialects.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
ITL 508: Syntax and Composition
This course analyzes and discusses finer
points of Italian grammar and investigates
142

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
diverse writing styles. Students will develop
grammatical drills from elementary through
advanced levels. Literary masterpieces are
translated to demonstrate types of style and
possible alternatives in writing.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
ITL 510: Advanced Conversation and
Composition
An examination of Italian in the context of
contemporary Italy, with an eye to the effects
of globalization and localism on language and
culture. Class readings and conversations focus
on today's multifaceted Italy, steering clear of
stereotyped images and misconceptions.
Prerequisite: Graduate status.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

Spring 2021
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ITL 551: Studies in Italian Romanticism
Italian romanticism is compared with the
movement as it took place in other countries,
such as England, Germany, and France. The
works of Foscolo, Leopardi, and Manzoni are
studied in the philosophical and sociological
contexts of the period.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
ITL 552: Studies in the Modern Novel
A study of the development of the Italian novel
from Verga to the latest trends. Stress is placed
on the major shifts in sensibility occurring at
the beginning of the 19th century and after
World War II.

ITL 511: History of the Italian Language Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
A study of the development of the Italian
B+, etc.)
language beginning with its Latin origins, and May be repeated for credit.
continuing through modern times.
ITL 562: Studies in Contemporary
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
Literature Contemporary Italian Poetry:
etc.)
The Quest for Meaning
Studies in 20th century literature.
ITL 512: Italian Dialects
The linguistic structures of the many
languages (i.e., "dialects") spoken in Italy are
analyzed. Consideration is also given to the
sociolinguistic situation.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ITL 581: Independent Individual
Studies
Fall and Spring , alternative years,

May be repeated for credit.
ITL 599: Thesis Research
May be repeated for credit
1-6 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
ITL 800: Summer Research
May be repeated for credit.

JPN
Japanese Language
JPN 501: Advanced Japanese I
An advanced course designed to strengthen
students¿ ability to understand and speak the
Japanese language. Students are required to
prepare selected texts and to read and translate
them in class. They also write essays based on
the texts as well as on Japanese videos.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
JPN 502: Advanced Japanese II
The second part of an advanced course in
Chinese deigned to strengthen students¿ ability
to understand and speak the Japanese
language. Students are required to prepare
selected texts and to read and translate them in
class. They also write essays based on the texts
as well as on Japanese videos.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

ITL 513: Romance Linguistics
This course examines the linguistic evolution
of the Romance languages from the classical
period through modern times. The synchronic
grammars of Italian, French, and Spanish are
examined.

1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ITL 591: Language Acquisition I
Elementary Italian I intended for graduate
students from other programs.

JPN 526: Structure of Japanese
The study of phonology, morphology, syntax,
semantics, lexicon, and writing systems of
the Japanese language as well as the use
and functions of the language in relation
to the social structures and interpersonal
relationships.

Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)

1-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

ITL 592: Language Acquisition II
Elementary Italian II intended for graduate
students from other programs.

JRN

ITL 516: Seminar on Dante
Dante's Vita Nuova and Divina Commedia
are analyzed within their historical, social
and moral context of 13th- and 14-centuries
Europe. Offered as ITL 516 and CEI 526.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ITL 522: Seminar in Italian Humanism
and Renaissance Literature
Analysis of the works of such writers as
Petrarch, Boccaccio, Ariosto, Machiavelli,
Castiglione, Aretino, Tasso, and Michelangelo.
Study of the relation of the individual works of
these writers to broader historical, cultural, and
intellectual developments of the period.

Journalism

1-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ITL 593: Language Acquisition III
Intermediate and Advanced Italian intended
for graduate students from other programs.
The requirements for the course will include a
graduate-level component to be determined by
the instructor. May be repeated for credit.
1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
ITL 595: Practicum in Teaching
Fall and Spring ,
1-3 credits, S/U grading

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

JRN 501: Foundations of Science
Communication I
In this team-taught, immersive science
communication training, students will build
skills to passionately communicate in a
way that excites, engages, and encourages
audiences to want to learn more about
their work. Improvisational theater-based
techniques are combined with message design
strategies like distilling and storytelling,
enabling healthcare professionals, scientists,
and researchers to use strategy and spontaneity
to execute powerful communication in any
context.
143

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

JRN 503: Foundations of Science
Communication II
In this immersive science communication
training, participants who have completed
JRN 501 will continue their foundations in
science communication with explorations into
engaging with key audiences and the media, as
well as creating a presentation accompanied by
compelling visuals.

JRN 587: Independent Study
Intensive study of a special topic or intensive
work on a reporting project undertaken with
close faculty supervision. May be repeated.
0-6 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

JRN 588: Graduate Internship
Students participate in an appropriate
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
internship with an organization or institution
devoted to the program content themes of
JRN 525: Health, Environment, Science science, health, environment or technology.
and Technology Reporting
The work must involve skills related to the
The core course of the journalism master's
educational goals of the program. Student
program, this will introduce students to the
interns will report regularly to a faculty
range of science, health and environmental
member and will complete an internship
coverage while providing intensive instruction project, including a portfolio of work done.
and practice in reporting and writing in
0-6 credits, S/U grading
journalistic formats. The goal is for students
May be repeated for credit.
to learn how to think critically about scientific
claims and controversies and how to write
clear, accurate and vivid stories for print or
online media. Students will practice such
Korean
skills as developing sources, interviewing
experts, finding stories, doing online research,
KOR 501: Advanced Korean I
organizing material, using statistics correctly,
An advanced course designed for students who
and presenting technical information in lay
wish to enhance reading comprehension and
terms. Field trips will introduce students to
writing ability in Korean. Reading materials
work being done at Brookhaven National
are selected from modern Korean literature,
Laboratory and Stony Brook University
journals, and newspapers. Students are trained
Medical Center. A variety of written forms
in samples of various writing styles. Emphasis
will be explored including news and trend
stories, explanatory or human interest features, is also placed on the idiomatic usage of Korean
language and the relation of Korean to Chinese
profiles, blogging, and first-person essays.
This is an intensive course that meets six hours characters.
a week and requires at least 12 hours a week of 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
work outside class. Offered
Fall, 6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) KOR 502: Advanced Korean II
Advanced Korean II is designed for students
JRN 565: Communicating Your
who have completed at least two years of
Science
Korean instruction at the undergraduate
level or who already possess a sufficiently
Learning to communicate one¿s research is
high level of fluency. Classes are conducted
as important as learning to do the research.
in Korean. Reading materials, including
This course is designed to help graduate
excerpts from modern Korean literary works,
students in the sciences learn to communicate
journals, magazine and newspapers, will
effectively with multiple audiences, from
be explored and discussed. Other topics
peers and professors to potential employers,
such as ancient Korean literature will also
journalists, and family members. It builds
be discussed. Through this course students
on science communication research and is
designed to help students communicate clearly are expected to enhance their ability to
grasp the important of literary and academic
and vividly. They will develop skills that are
texts by learning to identify essential points
central to oral and written communication on
and lines of argument as well as enhance
any subject. Among the techniques applied
their vocabulary, particularly Sino-Korean
are improvisational theater exercises that
terms, and knowledge of idiomatic usage of
will help connect with an audience, pay
Chinese-Korean graph dictionaries, including
close and dynamic attention to others, read
a knowledge of the basic student of graphs and
nonverbal cues, respond freely and work
of the most common component radicals, in
through nerves and self-consciousness.
their original and abbreviated forms. Students
For permission to enroll, please contact:
aldacenter@stonybrook.edu

KOR

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

will also learn to research in Korean for their
term paper
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
KOR 526: Structure of Korean
This course is an introduction to phonology,
morphology, syntax, semantics, lexicon, and
writing systems of the Korean language as
well as the use and functions of the language
in relation to the social structures of Korea
at large. The goal of this course is to analyze
Korean in ways that might be of most use to
a KFL (Korean as a foreign language) teacher
and KFL student.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

LAT
Latin
LAT 581: Independent Study
May be repeated for credit as the topic
changes. Prerequisite: Must be enrolled in a
graduate program.
1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
LAT 591: Elementary Latin I
Designed to prepare the beginning student to
translate Latin that may be needed for use in
undergraduate or graduate study. Focus of the
course is on the fundamentals of grammar and
techniques of translation. LAT 111/LAT 591
is designed for students who have no prior
knowledge of the language. A student who has
had two or more years of Latin in high school
(or who has otherwise acquired an equivalent
proficiency) may not take LAT 111/LAT 591
without written permission from the course
supervisor.
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
LAT 592: Elementary Latin II
Designed to prepare the beginning student to
translate Latin that may be needed for use in
undergraduate or graduate study. Focus of the
course is on the fundamentals of grammar and
techniques of translation. Prerequisite: Latin
111 or equivalent
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
LAT 593: Readings in Latin Literature I
This course serves as an introduction to
authentic Latin prose and poetry. The
students will be introduced to the Roman
literature of the Republic and beginning of the
Empire. The course includes a brief intensive
review of grammar. Additional grammatical
constructions will be taught through the
literature. The students will read a sampling
144

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
of a number of authors including Eutropius,
Cornelius Nepos, Caesar, Ovid, and Horace
Prerequisite: Latin 112 or equivalent
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring 2021
teaching and assessment of speaking, listening,
reading, and writing. Review and evaluation
of resources and technologies. 3 credits, letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

LAT 594: Readings in Latin Literature 2
This course serves as a study of authentic
Latin prose and poetry. The students will
read Roman literature of the Republic and
beginning of the Empire. The course includes a
brief intensive review of grammar. Additional
grammatical constructions will be taught
through the literature. The students will read
a sampling of a number of authors including
Caesar, Virgil, Catullus and Cicero
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

LIN
Linguistics
LIN 521: Syntax I
A study of formal grammar as one aspect of
our knowledge of language. Concepts and
elements of modern syntactic analysis are
introduced and motivated using a variety
of grammatical phenomena and processes,
across a wide range of languages. Prerequisite:
Enrollment in LIN program or permission of
instructor
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
LIN 522: Phonetics
A study of articulatory phonetics and the
international phonetic alphabet, with intensive
practice in phonetic transcription from a wide
variety of languages. Acoustic phonetics,
speech perception, and the applications of
phonetics to foreign language teaching.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
LIN 523: Phonology I
An introduction to the formal study of sound
patterns. Problems from various languages
serve as the basis for developing a theory
of the representation of sound structure.
Prerequisite: Enrollment in LIN program or
permission of instructor

Study of the acquisition of a second language
by children and adults. The focus is on data;
the systematicity of the learner' errors, the ease
of acquisition in childhood, etc., the adequacy
of theories (e.g. Interlanguage processes,
the monitor model, the critical period) to
explain data, and the reliability of methods of
obtaining data. Students conduct an empirical
study testing a current hypothesis.

LIN 525: Contrastive Analysis
A survey of linguistic typology and a
comparison of various languages as a basis for
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
understanding the errors made by language
learners and devising strategies for teaching a
foreign language. May be crosslisted with CEL LIN 535: Historical Linguistics
551.
A study of linguistic change. Some general
topics to be discussed are the genetic
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
classification of languages; language families,
language, and prehistory; reconstruction; types
LIN 526: Analysis of an Uncommonly
of sound change; types of semantic change;
Taught Language
Working from primary and secondary sources, borrowing.
students construct an outline of the phonology, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
morphology, and syntax of a language
LIN 537: Computational Linguistics I
previously unknown to them.
A hands-on introduction to practical aspects
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
of computational linguistics. Students learn
May be repeated for credit.
how to perform common tasks such as tagging
and tokenization with a state-of-the-art
LIN 527: Structure of English
A description of the major sentence elements, programming language. Topics include basic
data structures and algorithms, n-gram models,
subsystems, and productive grammatical
regular expressions, and corpus linguistics.
processes of English. The justification of
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
grammatical categories, interaction between
systems and processes, and notions of standard
LIN 538: Statistics for Linguists
and correctness are discussed with a view to
their application in the ESL classroom.
A hands-on introduction to statistical methods
in linguistics using R@. Topics covered
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
include aggregation and summary, descriptive
statistics, data visualization, hypothesis testing,
LIN 529: TESOL Pedagogy: Language
and Literacy Development through the regression analysis, and an introduction to
hierarchical modeling. Students will gain
Content Areas (Methods II)
experience with quantitative analysis of realContent-based language and literacy
world linguistic data sets, including corpus
instruction and assessment to children and
data and experimental data, with emphasis
adolescents for whom English is not their
on a connection to students¿ own theoretical
first language, in alignment with current
research.
state, national, and professional standards.
Teacher candidates design standard-based and
data-driven curricular modules for teaching
language through mathematics, the sciences
and the social studies, engage in reflective
and collaborative practices, and evaluate webbased technologies. 3 credits, letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc)

0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

LIN 524: TESOL Pedagogy: Theory and
Practice (Methods I)
Theory and practical methodology of language
and literacy instruction and assessment to
children and adolescents for whom English
is not their first language, in alignment with
current state, national, and professional
standards. Inquiry into instructional
approaches, standard-based and data-driven
lesson planning, and reflective practices in the

LIN 530: Introduction to General
Linguistics
An introduction to modern theoretical and
applied linguistics, including phonology,
morphology, syntax, language acquisition,
historical linguistics, and sociolinguistics.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
LIN 532: Second Language Acquisition

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
LIN 539: Mathematical Methods in
Linguistics
An overview of the mathematical foundations
of theoretical and computational linguistics.
Topics covered include set theory, morphisms,
logic and model theory, algebra, lattices,
lambda calculus, probability theory,
information theory, and basics of formal
language theory. A strong emphasis is put on
the linguistic application of the mathematical
concepts in the student and analysis of natural
language data
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
LIN 541: Bilingualism
145

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Study of the social, linguistic, educational, and
psychological aspects of bilingualism.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
LIN 542: Sociolinguistics
An introduction to major topics in
sociolinguistics, including variation theory,
language attitudes, language planning,
language change, and pidgins and creoles.
Prerequisite: Enrollment in TESOL or LIN
program or permission of instructor

Spring 2021
classrooms. Partnerships with colleagues,
parents and the respective communities are
explored. 3 credits, letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc)
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

LIN 577: Field Experience for Teaching
English as a Foreign Language
Observation, inquiry, and practice of
instruction in the area of English as a Foreign
Language through various methods and in
various settings. Students interested in this
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
field experience are required to meet with
the instructor of LIN 524 and/or LIN 529 to
LIN 544: Language Acquisition and
prepare a specific semester plan. Fifty hours
Literacy Development
In-depth exploration of the theories of literacy fieldwork or research. Co-requisite: LIN 524
or LIN 529, offered fall and spring. This
and language development of native English
course does not satisfy requirements for NYS
speakers and students who are English
language learners pre-school through grade 12. Teacher Certification. 1 credit, S/U grading,
May be repeated 1 time for credit.
The development and assessment of literacy
1 credit, S/U grading
skills among children at various stages of
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
learning development and across disciplines
will be examined. Attention will also be
LIN 578: Field Experience in
given to children with special needs and the
Educational Contexts
integration of technology in the development
of literacy skills.
Exploration, inquiry, and practice of English
language instruction strategies and approaches.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Prerequisite: Admission to MA TESOL
LIN 550: Selected Topics in Linguistics Teacher Education Program
Topics are announced each semester. The
course may be repeated for credit if topic
differs.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
LIN 555: Error Analysis
Study of the systematic errors made by foreign
language learners and the potential of various
linguistic theories to predict and account for
these errors.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
LIN 571: TESOL Pedagogy: Curriculum
Design and Evaluation
An in-depth study of curriculum design and
evaluation with a focus on needs analysis,
goals and objectives, approaches to language
learning and teaching, assessment, resources,
and program evaluation.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

1 credit, S/U grading
LIN 579: Field Experience in TESOL
Grades N-12
Observation and practice of data-driven
language and literacy instruction and
assessment across disciplines for children and
adolescents for whom English is not their first
language. Teacher candidates are placed in
diverse educational settings in pre-elementary
through secondary levels for 50 hours of field
experience. 1 credit, S/U grading May be
repeated for credit
1 credit, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
LIN 581: Supervised Student Teaching
in TESOL: Primary and Middle Level
Grades N-6
TESOL teacher candidates receive supervised
practice teaching by arrangements with
selected schools across the region. The student
teacher reports to the school to which he or
she is assigned each full school day for the
entire semester. Applications must be filed in
the academic year preceding that in which the
teacher candidate plans to take the course. 3
credits, S/U grading

LIN 574: Managing Instruction,
Assessment, and Resources in TESOL
Investigation and evaluation of instructional
planning and assessment aligned with
current state, national, and professional
standards. Teacher candidates practice content3 credits, S/U grading
based curriculum development, and use
of technologies for language and literacy
LIN 582: Supervised Student Teaching
development among English language learners
in TESOL: High School (Grades 10-12)
and reflect on their teaching in multi-level
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

TESOL teacher candidates receive supervised
practice teaching by arrangement with selected
schools across the region. The student teacher
reports to the school to which he or she is
assigned each full school day for the entire
semester. Applications must be filed in the
academic year preceding that in which the
teacher candidate plans to take the course. 3
credits, S/U grading
3 credits, S/U grading
LIN 591: Directed Readings
Students read and evaluate the literature
on a topic of special academic interest or
professional relevance under the direction of a
faculty member.
1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
LIN 592: Directed Research
Students conduct research on a topic of special
academic interest or professional relevance
under the direction of a faculty member. The
course will also cover responsible conduct in
research and scholarship.
1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
LIN 595: Final Project
Students present a thesis consisting of original
work on a topic in theoretical, experimental, or
computational linguistics under the supervision
of a faculty member. The work may take
various forms, including a thesis, a technical
report, or a programming project. Both the
topic and the format of the work must be
approved by the faculty supervisor. 0-6 credits.
0-6 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
LIN 600: Colloquium in Linguistics
An introduction to research in linguistics, with
presentations by faculty and visiting scientists.
Topics include current research questions and
ethics of research and publishing. The course
will also cover responsible conduct in research
and scholarship.
0-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
LIN 605: Mathematical Linguistics
Workgroup
An introduction to research in mathematical
linguistics, with presentations by faculty,
students, and visiting scientists. Topics include
current research questions, the interplay of
linguistics with mathematics and other STEMfields, research software for mathematical
linguistics, mathematical writing in linguistics,
and how to present mathematical work to a
general public.
146

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
LIN 621: Syntax II
A detailed consideration of recent
developments in syntactic theory, including
treatments of constituency and word order,
grammatical relations, typological variation
and linguistic universals, and constraints on
grammatical rules and representations.
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
LIN 623: Phonology II
A study of recent developments in
phonological theory, with particular attention
to nonlinear models of phonological
representation and constraint-based models.
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
LIN 624: Morphology and Word
Formation
The internal structure of words and the
place of the word in syntax, phonology,
and the lexicon. A variety of analytical
methods -- distributional, experimental, and
computational-- will be introduced.
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
LIN 625: Semantics
An investigation of the role of semantics (the
theory of meaning) in the overall theory of
grammar, structured around such topics as
formal semantics, the interaction of syntax and
semantics, and lexical semantics. Prerequisite:
LIN 521

Spring 2021
checking, mereology, intensional semantics,
quantifier scope, pronoun resolution, discourse
representation, scalar implicatures, gametheoretic pragmatics, lexical semantics, and
Bayesian inference.

Students will develop familiarity with the
literature and tools of the field.

0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

LIN 650: Selected Topics: Graduate
Seminar
Topics will be announced each semester. The
course may be repeated for credit if topic
differs.

LIN 628: Computational Syntax
An in-depth survey of natural language
syntax from a computational perspective. The
primary focus is on combining state-of-theart techniques from formal language theory
with empirical insights from linguistic theory.
Topics covered vary by year and may include
tree transducers, logics for tree description,
weak and strong generative capacity of natural
language, lexicalized grammar formalisms,
unification grammars, or the expressivity of
probabilistic formalisms.
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
LIN 629: Learnability
An introduction to learnability theory and
its implications for language typology and
language acquisition. The selection of topics
varies and may include identification in the
limit from positive text, PAC learning, latticebased learners, Boolean function learning,
neural networks, and learning algorithms for
linguistic formalisms. Students will develop
familiarity with the primary literature and learn
important proof techniques of the field.
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

LIN 630: Parsing and Processing
A survey parsing theory for natural
language processing and its applications
LIN 626: Computational Phonology
An in-depth survey of natural phonology from in psycholinguistic modeling. The course
covers a wide variety of parsing algorithms
a computational perspective. Topics vary
for context-free and mildly context-sensitive
by year and may include formal language
grammar formalisms. The performance of
theory (subregular hierarchy, finite-state
these algorithms is carefully analyzed and set
transductions), computation modeling
(maximum entropy grammars, Hidden Markov in relation to empirical phenomena of human
sentence processing.
Models), and machine learning.
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

LIN 627: Computational Semantics
A study of the computational challenges that
arise in the interpretation of natural language
utterances. Students are introduced to the
logical description of sentence meaning and
how these descriptions can be constructed in
an algorithmic fashion. The course includes
a significant programming component. The
selection of topics varies from year to year
and may include propositional and first-order
logic, typed logics, model theory and model

LIN 637: Computational Linguistics 2
An introduction to the theoretical foundation
of computational linguistics. The course
emphasizes the importance of algorithms,
algebra, logic, and formal language theory in
the development of new tools and software
applications. Empirical phenomena in
phonology and syntax are sampled from a
variety of languages to motivate and illustrate
the use of concepts such as strictly local string
languages, tree transducers, and semirings.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
LIN 651: Syntax Seminar
Topic varies and relates to current issues in
the field and research activities of faculty
and students. Past topics have included
A-dependencies, adjectival and adverbial
modification, word order and antisymmetry.
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
LIN 653: Phonology Seminar
Topic varies and relates to current issues in
the field and research activities of faculty and
students. Past topics have included interface
issues (phonetics, morphology, syntax),
functional motivations for phonological
constraints (articulatory ease, perceptual
salience, parsing considerations), intonation,
and second language and loanword phonology.
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
LIN 655: Computational Linguistics
Seminar
An overview of the mathematical foundations
of theoretical and computational linguistics.
Topics covered include set theory, morphisms,
logic and model theory, algebra, lattices,
lambda calculus, probability theory,
information theory, and basics of formal
language theory. A strong emphasis is put on
the linguistic application of the mathematical
concepts in the student and analysis of natural
language data.
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
LIN 655: Computational Linguistics
Seminar
An overview of the mathematical foundations
of theoretical and computational linguistics.
Topics covered include set theory, morphisms,
logic and model theory, algebra, lattices,
lambda calculus, probability theory,
information theory, and basics of formal
language theory. A strong emphasis is pun on
the linguistic application of the mathematical
concepts in the study and analysis of natural
data.
147

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
LIN 680: Qualifying Paper Workshop
Doctoral candidates will present and discuss
their own research work. The course will also
cover responsible conduct in research and
scholarship. Prerequisite: Advanced standing
1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
LIN 698: Graduate Practicum in
Teaching
May be repeated for credit.
LIN 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Independent research for the Ph.D. degree.
Open only to candidates for the Ph.D. degree
who have advanced to candidacy (G5). Major
portion of research must take place on SBU
campus, at Cold Spring Harbor, or at the
Brookhaven National Lab. The course will
also cover responsible conduct in research and
scholarship.
1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

Spring 2021
LIN 800: Summer Research

Fall, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

May be repeated for credit.

MAE 540: Clinical Experience
Supervised classroom experience in both
middle school and high school settings,
including experience in a high needs district,
individual tutoring, working with small groups,
and working as an inclusion aide. Seminar
discussions focus on classroom observations
and experiences.

MAE
Mathematics Teacher
Preparation
MAE 501: Foundations of Secondary
Mathematics Curriculum
A re-examination of the current middle school
and high school mathematics curriculum.
A review of the techniques and discussion
of the ideas from a more advanced point of
view, including topics in algebra, geometry,
elementary functions, and probability and
statistics. Competence in basic secondary
school mathematical ideas and techniques is
tested.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAE 510: Introduction to Methods of
Teaching and Learning Standards
Introduction to the basic methods of teaching
middle school and high school mathematics,
including study of lesson designs based on
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics
(NCTM) and New York State standards,
and the study of pedagogical techniques
including cooperative learning and the uses
of technology. Students also engage in guided
observation of middle school and high school
mathematics classes.

LIN 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
are considered on-campus.
MAE 520: Advanced Methods
1-9 credits, S/U grading
of Teaching Secondary School
May be repeated for credit.
Mathematics
LIN 701: Dissertation Research off
The philosophy and goals of mathematics
Campus - International
education, with an emphasis on
implementation: curriculum development;
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
teaching techniques and styles, and learning
(G5). Major portion of research will take
theories and styles; lesson planning and
place outside of the United States and/or
assessment. Students will plan an entire unit,
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
the work sample, including lesson plans and
option of the health plan and may also enroll
assessments, for inclusion in the professional
in MEDEX. International students who are
portfolio.
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
MAE 530: Directed Readings and
be removed. International students who are
Research Paper in Mathematics
not in their home country are charged for the
Education
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
Tutorial studies concerning current issues
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
in mathematics education, including
charge will only be removed if other plan is
recent research and topics in the history of
deemed comparable.
mathematics and their relation to teaching
practice. Students write a research paper
All international students must receive
for inclusion in the professional portfolio.
clearance from an International Advisor.
Prerequisites: MAE 501 and 510. Enrollment
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
Limit: 18
May be repeated for credit.
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAE 551: Supervised Student
Teaching in Middle School
Student teaching under the supervision of an
experienced teacher in middle school and high
school settings. These courses must be taken
simultaneously.
Prerequisites: MAE 520, 530, and 540;
satisfaction of all other program requirements;
permission of the Director of Mathematics
Education.
Fall, 3 credits, S/U grading
MAE 552: Supervised Student
Teaching in High School
Student teaching under the supervision of an
experienced teacher in middle school and high
school settings. These courses must be taken
simultaneously.
Prerequisites: MAE 520, 530 and 540;
satisfaction of all other program requirements;
permission of the Director of Mathematics
Education.
Fall, 3 credits, S/U grading
MAE 554: Student Teaching Seminar
The student teaching experience (MAE
551/552) serves as a focus for weekly
discussions of teaching and learning styles
and techniques, and classroom management
issues. Includes N.Y. State mandated seminars
on child abuse, substance abuse and school
violence.
Prerequisite: Permission of the Director of
Mathematics Education.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAE 698: Independent Study,
Mathematics Education
Independent study. Topics in mathematics
education. Semesters Offered:
Fall, Spring, 1-12 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
MAE 699: Dissertation Research On
Campus
Dissertation research for students completing
thesis research in mathematics education.
1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
148

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
MAE 701: Dissertation Research Off
Campus
Off campus dissertation research for students
completing thesis research in mathematics
education. All international students must
receive clearance from an International
Advisor.
1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

MAR
Marine Sciences
MAR 501: Physical Oceanography
Examines physics of ocean circulation and
mixing on various scales with strong emphasis
on profound effects of Earth's rotation on
motions and distribution of properties. An
introduction to physics of estuaries and other
coastal water bodies.

Spring 2021
This course provides an introduction to the
general circulation of the atmosphere, covering
aspects in observations, data analyses, and
basic theories.

environments and how it governs the spatial
and temporal scales of the fluid dynamics
includes how these processes interact with
climate.

Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Prerequisite enrollment in MAS program or
permission of instructor
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MAR 506: Geological Oceanography
An introduction to the geological
oceanography of the world ocean with
emphasis on the coastal environment;
discussions of the physical processes
controlling the structure and evolution of
the ocean basins and continental margins,
the distribution of marine sediment, and the
development of coastal features.
Prerequisite: Enrollment in MAS program or
permission of instructor
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

MAR 507: Marine Conservation
The fundamental concepts of conservation
science, a synthetic field that incorporates
MAR 502: Biological Oceanography
principles of ecology, biogeography,
Examines biological processes in the ocean,
population genetics, systematics, evolutionary
and introduces major ocean biomes and groups biology, environmental sciences, sociology,
of organisms. A broad treatment of energy
anthropology, and philosophy toward the
and nutrient cycling in coastal and open ocean conservation of biological diversity will
environments.
be presented within the context of the
conservation of marine resources. Examples
Prerequisite: Enrollment in MAS program or
drawn from the marine environment emphasize
permission of instructor
how the application of conservation principles
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
varies in different environments.
etc.)
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MAR 503: Chemical Oceanography
Introduction to chemical oceanography.
Topics include origin and history of seawater,
major and minor constituents, dissolved
gases, the carbon dioxide system, distribution
of properties in the world ocean, isotope
geochemistry, and estuarine and hydrothermal
vent geochemistry.
Prerequisite: Enrollment in MAS program or
permission of instructor
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MAR 504: Statistics and Experimental
Design
This course has been devised to provide basic
background and hands on experience to assist
graduate students in developing key skills in
an essential aspect of the research enterprise,
namely statistics analysis and experimental
design.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAR 505: General Circulation of the
Atmosphere

Prerequisite: Enrollment in MCP or MAS
program or permission of instructor
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAR 508: Found Mar Sci
1:Biogeochemical
This course provides an integrated view of the
chemistry, geology and biology of the oceans,
using the carbon cycle as an overarching
theme to help students tie more specific
concepts, mechanisms, and facts into a unified
whole. Several other themes will also be
embedded throughout the course, including
other elemental cycles, timescales on which
various processes operate, differences in how
major ocean ecosystems (biomes) function,
and the biogeochemical evolution of Earth.

MAR 510: Modeling Techniques in
Chemical Oceanography
Derivation of solutions to advection-diffusionreaction equations for marine sediments and
waters. One- and multi-dimensional models
are developed for dissolved and solid-phase
substances in cartesian, cylindrical, and
spherical coordinates. Effect of imposing
multiple layers on these systems is examined.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MAR 511: Benthic Ecology
This course focuses on the ecological
interactions of benthic organisms and
their habitat. Topics include life histories,
the roles of competition, predation and
disturbance, feeding adaptations and food
webs, interactions between benthic organisms
and water motion, sediment chemistry, and
other abiotic factors, and evolutionary history
of benthic ecological processes.
Spring, alternate years, 2 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAR 512: Marine Pollution
Review of the physical and chemical
characteristics and speciation in the marine
environment of organic pollutants, metals
and radionuclides including bioavailability,
assimilation by marine organisms, toxicity, and
policy issues.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MAR 513: Atmospheric AerosolsClouds, Climate, and Chemistry
Atmospheric aerosol particles have been
recognized to contribute the largest
uncertainties to the global radiative forcing
estimates and affect air quality. This course
introduces graduate students to the physical
and chemical properties of aerosol particles
Prerequisite enrollment in MAS program or
and how those affect the particles' role in
permission of instructor
the atmosphere. Knowledge of how these
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) particles interact with their surroundings is
crucial to assess the impact of aerosols on
MAR 509: Found Mar Sci 2: Physics of air quality and climate. This course covers
Oceans, Atmos, Climate
the fundamental mathematical, physical, and
Introduction to principles of physics governing chemical descriptions of aerosol particles such
the patterns of ocean and atmospheric
as particle size distributions, thermodynamics
properties. Discussion of the theoretical
of aerosols, aerosol hygroscopicity, physical
basis for energy exchange between the two
and chemical particle transformation,

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

149

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

carbonaceous aerosol, aerosol cloud interaction
(cloud condensation and ice nuclei), aerosol
optical properties, aerosol climate effects,
and gas-to-particle (heterogeneous) reactive
processes.

interactions; surface wave prediction; beach
processes.

human and environmental health are examined
in case study format.

Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MAR 518: Coastal Processes
Coastal Processes: Classification and basic
theory of water wavies, tides and sediment
transport. This background forms the
basis for a description of shote processes
including beaches, and coastal erosion. The
variety of the world¿s coastal environments
will be differentiated in terms of physical
processes. The behavior of beaches also will
be examined. Co-scheduled with MAR 304
Waves, Tides and Beaches.

MAR 523: Marine Mammal Biology and
Conservation
This course provides an introduction to the
basic biology of marine mammals, focusing
particularly on various adaptations (e.g.,
morphological, physiological, acoustic) to
life in the marine environment, as well as the
ecology and behavior of marine mammals, and
the conservation and management of marine
mammal populations.

MAR 514: Environmental Management
This is an introduction to environmental
management, and will focus on the interplay
between science and public policy. Concepts
include problem identification and definition,
collection and analysis of relevant data
to produce information, and the roles of
public perception and action in ultimately
determining outcomes when consensus is
not reached. Specific fields to which these
concepts will be applied will be solid waste
management and coastal management. Current
local problems will be used to illustrate the
broader conceptual issues. Offered as MAR
514, EST 540 and CEY 501. Prerequisite:
Permission of instructor

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MAR 524: Organic Contaminant
Hydrology
There are a host of chemical, biological, and
physical processes that affect the transport
and fate of organic chemicals in natural
waters. This course concerns understanding
Offered in Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
these processes and the structure-activity
A-, B+, etc.)
relationships available for predicting their
rates. The major focus of this class is on
MAR 515: Phytoplankton Ecology
contaminant hydrology of soil and aquifer
Prerequisite: MAR 503 or permission of
The biology and ecology of marine
environments, and includes the principles
instructor
phytoplankton. Covered are life cycles,
Spring, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) behind remediation and containment
growth, nutrient uptake, grazing, and the
technologies. This course is offered as both
May be repeated for credit.
effects of environmental factors on growth and
MAR 524 and GEO 524.
survival of phytoplankton. The characteristics MAR 520: New Production and
Prerequisite: GEO 526 or MAR 503 or
of various classes are examined and are related Geochemical Cycles
permission of instructor
to environmental conditions.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
Consideration of oceanic new production
Prerequisites: General biology
etc.)
for a variety of ecosystems. Quantitative
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) examination of the impact of new production
MAR 525: Environment & Public Health
on the transport and cycling of major and
MAR 516: Ecosystem Science for
minor elements and pollutants.
Review of the interactions of humans with the
Fisheries Management
atmosphere and water resources, especially
Spring, alternate years, 2 credits, Letter
This course will provide an overview of
in the Long Island coastal community.
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
the science and mathematical models that
An introduction is provided to the field of
are typically used to inform Ecosystemenvironmental health and the practices relevant
MAR 521: Long Island's Groundwater
based Fisheries Management (EBFM).
to an urban/suburban and coastal setting.
This course will cover basic groundwater
The course will review single-species
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
concepts in unconsolidated sediments, and
models, multispecies models and full system
examine contamination issues in light of Long
modelsl Advantages and disadvantages
MAR 526: Mechanisms of Pollutant
Island's particular hydrogeology, land use,
of implementing these approaches into
and waste management history. Mathematical Responses in Aquatic Organisms
management and policy will be explored.
principles will be discussed but not stressed;
This course examines the molecular and
No modeling experience is necessary. The
scientific and technical papers discussing
biochemical basis for contaminant responses
course requires familiarity with quantitative
particular concepts or problems, including
in aquatic organisms. Course will be taught
menthods, but emphasizes current literature
important local examples, will be closely read. in seminar format utilizing the current
and case studies where EBFM has been or is
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. Offered scientific literature as a basis for discussion.
being implemented as main learning elements.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.
as MAR 521 or HPH 673.
Offered in Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, Offered in Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, Fall, alternate years, 2 credits, Letter graded
B+, etc.)
B+, etc.)
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAR 517: Waves
Theory and observations of surface waves,
internal waves, and planetary waves; wavewave, wave-current, and wave-turbulence

MAR 519: Geochemistry Seminar
This course explores topics in low-temperature
geochemistry as chosen by the instructors and
participants. The seminar series is organized
around a theme such as early diagenesis,
estuarine geochemistry, or aquatic chemistry.
Students are required to lead one of the
seminars and to participate in discussions.

MAR 522: Envir Toxicology & Public
Health
Principles of toxicology and epidemiology are
presented and problems associated with major
classes of toxic chemicals and radiation to

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

MAR 527: Global Change
The course examines the scientific basis
behind questions of global change and
some of the policy implications of changes
to the region and country. Topics include
150

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
evidence and courses of past climactic
changes, greenhouse gases and the greenhouse
effect, analogues with other planets, the
Gaia hypothesis, climate modeling, and
deforestation and the depletion of ozone.

Spring 2021
www.stonybrook.edu/coursefees for more
information.
Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

MAR 532: Marine Protected Areas
Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) are parts
of the ocean that are zoned to exclude
activities that are potentially detrimental to
MAR 528: Ocean Atmosphere
the ecosystem. Marine Reserves are special
Interactions
types of MPAs in which the harvesting
This course discusses the fundamental physical of marine wildlife is prohibited. MPAs
mechanisms through which the ocean and
are rapidly gaining traction worldwide as
atmosphere interact. These principles are
a tool to preserve or restore ecosystems,
applied to the understanding of phenomena,
protect endangered species, or sustain nearby
such as the El Nino Southern Oscillation,
commercial and recreational fisheries. This
the effects of sea surface temperature on
course is designed to provide students with
the distribution of low-level winds and
a robust background in the science behind
development of tropical deep convection, and
the design, implementation, and expected
the effects of tropical deep convection and
outcomes of establishing MPAs. The course
mid-latitude storms on the ocean's mixed layer. is largely field-based, and will explore
Both modeling and observational aspects are
MPA-related issues by traveling to one or
discussed. Material will be taken from selected more MPAs to learn about the challenges,
textbooks, as well as recent literature.
benefits, and limitations of MPAs for marine
conservation from local scientists, managers,
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
and rangers.
Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall, alternate years, 2 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)

MAR 529: Isotope Geochemistry
This course deals both with the use of radio
and stable isotope applications to the earth
sciences.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAR 530: Organic Geochemistry
Introduction to the organic chemistry of
the earth, oceans, and atmosphere. Topics
include production transformation and fate
of organic matter; use of organic biomarkers
and stable and radioisotopes; diagenesis in
recent sediments; oil and coal production and
composition; dissolved and particulate organic
matter in seawater.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAR 531: Long Island Marine Habitats
Focusing on six representative marine
environments around Long Island, this
course emphasizes the natural history of local
marine communities, as well as quantitative
ecology, hypothesis testing, and scientific
writing. Students visit the sites, measure
environmental parameters, and identify the
distribution and abundance of common plants
and animals. Using qualitative and quantitative
methods in the field and laboratory, the class
determines major factors that control the
community structure in each habitat. This
course has an associated fee. Please see

work environments involved in scientific
decision making. Local speakers will be
invited, but most presentations will be remote
via standard network tools, thereby eliminating
travel costs and greatly lowering the barrier
to participation and hence enabling a very
wide ranging seminar program. We already
anticipate seminars from scientists at NOAA,
NASA, NIH, DOE, Global Electric, IBM
and CDC laboratories, and from officials of
multiple local, state and federal agencies,
and from journalists associated with multiple
formats. The sessions will be recorded and
made available for nationwide access.
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MAR 535: The Atom and
Environmental Radiation in the Nuclear
Age
This course will address technical and societal
aspects relating to nuclear power and the
general issue of environmental radioactivity.
It will cover basics of the nuclear industry and
the nature of radioactivity. This includes the
production, storage, and disposal of diverse
radionuclides emanating from the nuclear
fuel cycle and nuclear weapons testing. The
properties of major radionuclides will be
explored. The course will also consider the
MAR 533: Instrumental Analysis
complex issue of biological risks posed by
Fundamental principles of instrumental
chemical analysis and practical applications of radionuclides at different doses to living
molecular spectroscopy, atomic spectroscopy, organisms, including man. Economic and
mass spectrometry and chromatography. These political constraints on nuclear power
generation will be discussed for the US
instruments are widely used in environmental
and other countries, as will the actual and
and oceanography problem solving. Lectures
cover basic concepts of chemical analysis and perceived risks associated with environmental
radioactivity.
the fundamental principles of the analytical
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
techniques to be used. In the laboratory,
students gain hands-on experience both by
performing a series of required basic chemical MAR 536: Environmental Law and
Regulation
determinations (nutrients and trace metals
in sediments and in seawater water) and by
This course covers environmental law and
undertaking special projects. Students prepare regulations from inception in common
written reports describing the methods, the
law through statutory law and regulations.
theory underlying those methods, results, and
The initial approach entails the review of
figures of merit. Students also present their
important case law giving rise to today's body
results orally in brief presentations.
of environmental regulations. Emphasis is on
environmental statutes and regulations dealing
Prerequisites: Permission of instructor
with waterfront and coastal development
Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
and solid waste as well as New York State's
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA)
and the National Environmental Policy Act
MAR 534: Scientific Decision Support
(NEPA). This course is cross-listed with CEY
In this innovative course, professional
503.
government and industry scientists, policy
makers and other decision makers will present
and lead discussions on the science, societal
and other challenges associated with decision
support in their field. We will explore a wide
range of decision support systems ranging
from decision making in public health, natural
resource management, and climate adaptation
as well as explore different career paths and

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAR 537: Tropical Marine Ecology
The goal of this class is to teach students
about the ecology of the tropical coral reef
environments through lectures, field trips,
snorkeling trips, SCUBA diving trips and
student designed research projects. The first
151

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
half of the course will be devoted to formal
lectures, demonstrations, and instructor-led
field trips to provide students with a basic
knowledge of the common organisms and the
roles they play in various coral reef ecosystem.
During the second half of the course, with help
from faculty, students will develop and carry
out individual research projects examining
organismal ecology of coral reefs.
4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAR 538: Methods of Univariate
Statistics in Atmospheric and Ocean
Sciences
An introduction to basic statistical concepts
and their applications to analysis of data in
atmospheric and marine sciences. The topics
include distribution, statistical estimation,
hypothesis testing, analysis of variance,
linear and nonlinear regression analysis, and
basics of experimental design. In-depth class
discussions of the theoretical concepts are
accompanied by extensive applications to data
sets supplied by the instructor and the students.
Prerequisites: Enrollment in MAS program or
permission of instructor
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAR 539: Economics of Coastal and
Marine Ecosystems
Considering the socioeconomic implications
of policy decisions involving environmental
and natural resources has become increasingly
important for ecosystem management. This
course will view human interactions with
coastal and marine ecosystems through the
lens of economics. Topics will include the
basics of welfare analysis, the concept of
ecosystem services, the challenges associated
with public goods, methods for economic
valuation of non-market goods and services,
and strategies for sustainable use of coastal
and marine resources. In addition to exploring
the fundamental principles of environmental
economics, the course will also evaluate their
real-world application through national and
international policy examples.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MAR 540: Marine Microbial Ecology
An historical perspective of the field,
aspects of nutrition and growth, microbial
metabolism, and trophodynamic relationships
with other organisms. Emphasis on roles of
microorganisms in marine environments such
as salt marshes, estuaries, coastal pelagic
ecosystems, and the deep sea, as well as
microbial contribution to geochemical cycles.
Contemporary and classical methodologies
covered.

Spring 2021
Prerequisite: MAR 502 or permission of
instructor
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)

MAR 541: Foundations of Atmospheric
Sciences I
This course is intended to introduce graduate
majors to the foundations in the atmospheric
sciences necessary for future, more specialized
courses. This course covers atmospheric
thermodynamics, radiative transfer,
tropospheric and stratospheric chemistry, and
cloud microphysics.

MAR 547: Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
I
Fundamentals of rotating, stratified fluid
dynamics as applied to atmospheric and
oceanic flows: primitive equations, shallow
water theory, potential vorticity dynamics,
quasigeostrophic approximation, barotropic
instability, and baroclinic instability.
Prerequisite: MAR 501, MAR 509, or
permission of instructor Offered Spring

Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MAR 542: Foundations of Atmospheric
Sciences II
This course introduces cloud physics,
atmospheric chemistry, boundary layer
turbulence, and atmospheric radiation. This
is the second course in a two-course series
taught at the level appropriate to all students in
atmospheric sciences.

MAR 548: Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
II
Continuation of geophysical fluid dynamics
I. Course covers waves and wave-mean flow
interaction in geophysical fluids dynamics
with examples from oceanic and atmospheric
flows. Prerequisite: Mar 547 or permission of
instructor Offered Fall

Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MAR 544: Atmospheric Radiation
Discussion of the compositions and radiative
components of planetary atmospheres.
Blackbody and gaseous radiation with
emphasis on the respective roles of
electromagnetic theory and quantum statistics.
Derivation of the equation of transfer and
radiative exchange integrals, with application
to energy transfer processes within the
atmospheres of Earth and other planets.

MAR 549: Current Topics in
Atmospheric Sciences
This course will discuss current research topics
in atmospheric sciences and their connections
with advance course materials.

Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAR 545: Paleoceonography and
Paleoclimatology
This course will provide an extensive
overview of the methods used in paleoclimate
research and an examination of important
climate events during the Late-Mesozoic and
Cenozoic eras. We will discuss proxies used
to create paleoclimate reconstructions forcing
mechanisms on interannual to million year
time scales, climate effects on geological and
biological processes, and the modeling of
present climate and extrapolation to past and
future climates.
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAR 546: Marine Sedimentology
Study of sedimentology in the marine
environment including an introduction to
fluid mechanics, sediment transport theory,
quantitative models of sedimentation, and
dynamic stratigraphy.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Semesters Offered:
Fall and Spring, 0-2 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
MAR 550: Topics in Marine Sciences
This is used to present special interest courses,
including intensive short courses by visiting
and adjunct faculty and courses requested by
students. Those given in recent years include
Nature of Marine Ecosystems, Science and
Technology in Public Institutions, Plutonium
in the Marine Environment and Problems in
Estuarine Sedimentation.
Fall and Spring, 2 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAR 551: Special Topics in
Management
This course involves in-depth examination and
assessment of one or two topical problems and
issues in the management of fisheries in the
mid-Atlantic region. Fisheries management
encompasses a diversity of disciplines and
interests: biology, ecology, mathematics,
law, policy, economics, analytical modeling,
sociology, and anthropology. The class
conducts a detailed and thorough review
of one or two key fisheries management
problems that incorporate component issues
spanning this range of disciplines. Students
152

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
form several teams, each team focusing
on one aspect of the overall problem and
preparing a report detailing that aspect and
making recommendations on how management
decisions can be improved.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall and Spring, 1-4 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAR 552: Directed Study
Individual studies under the guidance of
a faculty member. Subject matter varies
according to the needs of the students. Fall,
Spring and
Summer, 1-12 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
MAR 553: Fishery Management
Survey of the basic principles of and
techniques for studying the population
dynamics of marine fish and shellfish.
Discussion of the theoretical basis for
management of exploited fishes and shellfish,
contrasting management in theory and in
practice using local, national, and international
examples. Includes lab exercises in the use
of computer-based models for fish stock
assessment.
Prerequisite: Calculus I or permission of
instructor
Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAR 554: Aquatic Animal Diseases
This course is designed to expose students
to fundamental and current issues pertaining
to host/pathogen interactions in aquatic
environment. By the end of the course,
students should have a basic understanding
of disease processes in aquatic animals;
knowledge of the tools used for disease
diagnosis; and an appreciation of disease
management tools available today. A particular
accent is given to the role of the environment
as an important factor in infectious and noninfectious diseases.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MAR 556: Conservation's 3 Rs:
Reading, Writing, Raising Money
By providing instruction in critical reading,
effective writing, and fundraising, this
course will fill a need for graduate students,
particularly for students in the Marine
Conservation and Policy (MCP) program.
This course will help students to both
understand the public discourse in marine
and wildlife conservation and policy issues
and to effectively communicate these issues

Spring 2021
to a wide audience. Although the course
was designed with Marine Conservation and
Policy students in mind, the course will also
be useful to graduate students interested in
improving their ability to write effective,
understandable, and interesting pieces that
help advance public understanding and support
for issues in conservation and science more
generally. Communication and outreach,
and particularly the ability to express the
importance of scientific research to the public,
is an important component of conducting
research and doing conservation work,
and is increasingly becoming required and
emphasized by funding agencies.
2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAR 557: Case Study and Project
Planning Seminar
This seminar will introduce students to case
studies in marine conservation carried out
regionally, nationally, and internationally
through seminars given by professionals in
the field. In addition students will be given
direction on how to develop a plan for a case
study as well as instruction on how to obtain,
analyze, and present data. Students will be
required to submit a written project plan for
either their Capstone Project or Internship
prior to the end of the semester.
Fall, 1 credit, S/U grading
MAR 558: Remote Sensing
Theory and application of remote sensing
and digital image analysis to marine research.
Students use standard software and PCs
for digital filtering, enhancement, and
classification of imagery.
Prerequisite: MAR 501, 502, 504, 506, or
permission of instructor
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MAR 559: Risk Analysis, Error and
Uncertainty
This seminar style course will explore error
estimation, uncertainty propagation, risk
analysis, model validation, and decision
analysis.
Fall, alternate years, 2 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAR 560: Ecology of Fishes
Introduction to current research in the
ecology of fishes. Topics such as population
regulation, migration, reproductive strategies,
predator-prey interactions, feeding behavior,
competition, life history strategies, and others
are discussed.
Prerequisite: Familiarity with concepts of
ecology or biological oceanography

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAR 561: Quantitative Fisheries
Ecology
The course covers quantitative models that are
currently utilized to assess the status of fish
stocks and academic pursuits of understanding
single-species and ecosystem dynamics. The
course builds on basic ecological models
such as the density-independent expotential
and density-dependent logistic models and
introduces equilibrium and non-equilibrium
production models and statistical-catch-atage techniques. Recruitment and growth
models commonly used infisheries ecology
are also covered. Least-squares, non-linear and
likelihood methods are methods are utilized
in model parameter estimation. Statistical
techniques such as bootstrapping and Monte
Carlo methods are used to assess uncertainty
in models outputs. This course is useful for
students that plan academic or management
careers in fisheries and wildlife research.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAR 562: Early Diagenesis of Marine
Sediments
The course treats qualitative and quantitative
aspects of the early diagenesis of sediments.
Topics include diffusion and adsorption
of dissolved species; organic matter
decomposition and storage; and diagenesis of
clay materials, sulfur compounds, and calcium
carbonates. The effects of bioturbation on
sediment diagenesis are also discussed. This
course is offered as both MAR 562 and GEO
562.
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAR 563: Early Diagenesis of Marine
Sediments II
The basic principles and concepts of diagenetic
processes developed in MAR/GEO 562 are
used to examine in detail early diagenesis in
a range of sedimentary environments. These
include terrigenous and biogenic sediments
from estuarine, lagoonal, deltaic, open shelf,
hemipelagic, oligotrophic deep-sea, and
hydrothermal regions.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAR 564: Atmospheric Structure and
Analysis
Real world applications of basic dynamical
principles to develop a physical understanding
of various weather phenomena. Topics include
the hypsomatric equation, structure and
evolution of extratropical cyclones, fronts,
153

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
hurricanes and convective systems, surface
and upper air analysis techniques, radar and
satellite interpretation, and introduction to
operational products and forecasting.
Prerequisite: 1 year of calculus.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MAR 565: Tropical Meteorology
The goal of this class is to provide a
working knowledge of the dynamics and
thermodynamics of the tropical atmosphere. A
variety of tropical circulations and phenomena
will be studied in detail, including regional
and large-scale tropical circulations and their
role in the global general circulation, tropical
wave dynamics, convection and convective
systems, synoptic, intraseasonal, and seasonal
variability; monsoons, the El Niño/Southern
Oscillation, tropical cyclones.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MAR 566: Air Pollution and Its Control
This course provides an overall picture of air
pollution caused by gas phase species and
airborne particulate matter. The sources of
air pollution and their effect on air quality
on an urban, regional, and global scale will
be addressed. The causes of London type
smog and modern photochemical smog are
discussed. The health impacts of primary and
secondary air pollutants are assessed. The
causes and consequences of the stratospheric
ozone hole and subsequent policy regulations
are discussed. The natural greenhouse effect
and our current understanding of global
warming are addressed.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MAR 567: Chemical Sensors in
Oceanography
An introduction to chemical sensors and their
application in oceanography with emphasis
on in-situ sensing in coastal environments,
discussions of the sensor principles and
fabrication, and biogeochemical processes
revealed by in-situ measurements.

Spring 2021
interactions (including questions and
discussions after presentations, critical reading,
and peer review) characteristic of working
as a scientist. Students will learn to construct
hypotheses and approaches to test them, write
a scientific proposal, evaluate proposals as a
peer reviewer, critically read papers from the
primary scientific literature, give interesting,
informative, and concise oral scientific
presentations, explain and justify the standards
of responsible conduct of research, identify
irresponsible conduct of scientific research and
respond appropriately. Spring

Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MAR 573: Special Topics-Chemical
Oceanography
This course is designed for the discussion of
topics of special interest on demand that is
not covered in regularly scheduled courses.
Examples of possible topics include carbonate
chemistry, isotope chemistry, and microbial
chemistry.

MAR 569: Statistics With R
Essentials of conducting statistical analyses
using software developed by the R Project for
Statistical Computing. R is free software that
has been developed by contributors around
the world and is quickly becoming a standard
environment for conducting scientific data
analyses. The course will cover the basic
language, data management, graphics, and
the application of R to a variety of statistical
techniques such as ANOVA, regression, MDS
and PCA, GLMs and GAMs. The class is
intended to explore the capabilities of R and
a basic graduate understanding of statistics is
required.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAR 570: Methods of Multivariate
Statistics in Atmospheric and Marine
Sciences
This course on multivariate statistical
methods of interest in marine and atmospheric
sciences discussesPrincipal component (EOF)
analysis, canonical correlation analysis,
maximum covariance analysis, discrimination
and classification, and cluster analysis.
Applications of the topics to oceanographic/
atmospheric data are shown using MATLAB.
The class provides a hands-on experience
requiring each student to apply the techniques
to his/her own data and the results are
discussed in class with feedback from the
instructors and other students.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring, alternate years, 2 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MAR 571: Zooplankton Ecology
The course is designed to acquaint the student
MAR 568: Practical Skills for Scientists with the theoretical problems and applied
methodology in ecological studies of marine
This course is designed to introduce firstand freshwater zooplankton. Topics will
year graduate students to the standards and
include taxonomy, anatomy, physiology, life
practices of conducting original scientific
history strategies, population dynamics, and
research in a professional and responsible
food chain interaction.
manner. This course will guide students as
they develop practical skills in communicating Prerequisites: MAR 502 and permission of
instructor
in both oral and written formats, and as they
practice some of the formal and informal
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

MAR 572: Geophysical Simulation
Basic equations and boundary conditions.
Linear and nonlinear instabilities. Finitedifference and time integration techniques
for problems in geophysical fluid dynamics.
Numerical design of global atmospheric and
ocean models.
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)

1-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAR 574: Special Topics: Ocean
Dynamics
Introductory dynamical oceanography,
framework and applications.
1-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAR 575: Special Topics-Geological
Oceanography
The course proposes to take several views of
the ecology and biogeochemistry of intertidal
wetlands to see whether one or more of these
views might be useful in reinvigorating interest
in the study of wetland function for its own
sake. Ecology and plant life history will be
studied in addition to geology and wetlands
management.
1-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAR 576: Special Topics-Biological
Oceanography
The course is designed for the discussion of
topics of special interest on demand that is
not covered in regularly scheduled courses.
Examples of possible topics include grazing
in benthic environment, coastal upwelling,
the nature of marine ecosystems, and marine
pollution processes.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall, 1-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAR 577: Special Topics-Coastal Zone
Management

154

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
The course is designed for the discussion
of topics of special interest on demand
that is not covered in regularly scheduled
courses. Examples of possible topics include
microcomputer information systems,
environmental law, coastal pollution, dredge
spoil disposal, science and technology in
public institutions, and coastal marine policy.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall and Spring, 1-4 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAR 578: Bio & Conservation/Seabirds
This course provides an overview of the
biology and conservation of seabirds, covering
basic and applied aspects of seabird biology.
We examine specific biological adaptations
(e.g., morphological and physiological
adaptations for diving and flying) in the first
third of the course, and review populationlevel processes and behavioral patterns (e.g.,
population ecology and migration) in the
second part of the course. The last third of
the course applies this knowledge of seabird
biology and ecology to current conservation
issues and management efforts, both within the
United States and internationally.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAR 579: Bio & Conservation/Sea
Turtles
This course provides an overview of the
biology and conservation of sea turtles,
and highlights different "solutions" to
challenges these organisms face while
living in the marine environment. We begin
by discussing biological adaptations and
ecological processes, and will then examine
these concepts in relation to conservation
and management issues facing different sea
turtle species. This course will be primarily
lecture-based, although we will take advantage
of additional learning opportunities, such
as necropsies conducted with the Riverhead
Foundation.

Spring 2021
view of how these methods can be used to
answer questions regarding marine organisms,
evolution, biology and ecology. Over the
course of the semester, examples will cover
various topics including marine biodiversity,
population structures, environmental
adaptation, stress responses, phylogeny of
animals, aquaculture and fisheries, interaction
between species (predation, parasitism,
mutualism). A particular accent is given
to the role of Next Generation Sequencing
technologies in answering questions related to
these topics.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAR 582: Advanced Atmospheric
Dynamics
Application of the concepts of balanced flow
and potential vorticity thinking - conservation
and inversion - to study wave propagation,
baroclinic instability, evolution of cyclones
and baroclinic waves, and wave- mean flow
interactions.
Prerequisite: MAR 594
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MAR 583: Doppler Weather Radar
This class is designed to provide students who
have not previously had an undergraduate
class on the topic with a working knowledge
of Doppler weather radar, including: what
the basic components of a weather radar
are, a theoretical background of how radars
operate, an in-depth understanding of the wide
variety of weather radar applications used in
atmospheric science careers, and an overview
on the use of emerging radar technologies
in new and updated Doppler weather radar
systems. Students also will gain hands-on
experience working with Doppler radar data
and radar viewing and editing software.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

MAR 584: Applied Marine Ecology
Seminar
This course provides an opportunity for
MAR 580: Seminar
advanced graduate students to practice
A weekly series of research seminars presented presenting data on their thesis research in
by visiting scientists and members of the staff. areas broadly related to how individuals and
communities of marine organisms respond to
Fall and Spring, S/U grading
changes in their environments. Each student
May be repeated for credit.
will prepare an abstract of the work they
MAR 581: Next Generation Sequencing plan to present and assign an appropriate
review or research paper for the class to read.
Applications in Functional Genomics
They will then prepare a formal presentation
Functional and Integrative genomics is a new
of their work suitable for a departmental
area of marine research that seeks to place
seminar. Faculty and students will provide
the functional significance of an organism¿s
constructive criticism of the presentation as
genes into an ecological and evolutionary
well as participate in a discussion of the work..
context. This course provides an integrated
May be taken more than once for credit.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Fall, 1 credit, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
MAR 585: Coastal Geology Seminar
An assessment of recent developments in
coastal geology. Discussion of advances in the
application of sedimentology, stratigraphy,
and geomorphology to the study of coastal
environments. Modern-ancient analogues are
emphasized where appropriate.
Prerequisite: Stratigraphy and sedimentary
marine geology
Fall, 2 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
MAR 586: Introduction to Ecological
Modeling
This course will provide students with a
familiarity of the major concepts, approaches,
and underlying rationale for modeling in
the ecological sciences. Topics will include
reviews of theoretical and empirical models,
the use of models in adaptive management,
and how to confront models with data to
evaluate alternative hypotheses. Roughly
1/3 of the course will be devoted to the
use of models in management, focusing on
the problems of fitting models to data and
management pitfalls that follow. Course work
will consist of readings, in class exercises,
and group assignments that involve the
construction, analysis, and interpretation of
ecological models.
Prerequisite: BEE 550, BEE 552; MAT 131 or
equivalent; any statistics course.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MAR 587: GIS: Display and Analysis of
Environmental Data
Elements of Geographic Information Systems
(GIS) with an emphasis on environmental
applications, especially those related to marine
and coastal systems. The course includes
hands-on exercises to familiarize students with
GIS capabilities. A project will be required.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MAR 588: Molecular Marine Ecology
DNA analysis offers a new window into the
ecology of marine organisms, shedding light
on aspects of their biology that are traditionally
difficult to study, such as their evolutionary
history, population structure, population
demographic history and reproductive
patterns. In this way, DNA analysis can help
us better manage fisheries and conserve
endangered marine species. This course is
designed to expose graduate students to the
burgeoning field of molecular ecology and the
application of molecular analyses to fisheries
155

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

management and conservation. Lectures will
be supplemented by a group laboratory project,
where students will apply techniques such as
DNA extraction, polymerase chain reaction,
DNA sequencing and computer based analysis
of genetic data to address a contemporary
marine conservation or fisheries issue.

atmospheric chemistry, radiation transfer, and
planetary atmospheres. This course is intended
primarily for students who have passed the
written qualifying examination in atmospheric
sciences, although other students may enroll
with permission of the faculty seminar leader.

atmospheric science data, to perform
challenging simulations, and to explore
selected problems in marine and atmospheric
and related fields. The course will emphasize
functionalities and applications of the
matrix manipulations, signal processing,
Fall and Spring, 0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, statistical, and mapping toolboxes within
the context of marine science problems.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
A-, B+, etc.)
The goal is to give the students exposure to
May be repeated for credit.
tools and programming techniques to enable
MAR 589: Capstone Project in Marine
them to work individually or in a group
Conservation and Policy
MAR 596: Principles of Atmospheric
on a final project relevant to their research
Chemistry
Students will conduct an in depth capstone
study involving independent analysis of
The application of photochemistry and reaction interest. Topics will include efficient Matlab
programming techniques, simple numerical
available data and produce an original
kinetics to the atmospheres of the Earth and
modeling and learning to build a classifier for
synthesis paper based on a committeeplanets. The composition and structure of
recognition and measurement, separating and
approved, consequential topic in marine
various regions of atmospheres, including the
clustering data, graph and representation and
conservation. All students will also
troposphere, stratosphere, and ionosphere.
spectral clustering.
present their project at the annual Program
Incorporation of chemical rate processes and
2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Symposium.
physical transport into models. Production of
airglow and auroral emissions.
Prerequisite: Permission of Instructor
MAR 602: Marine Invasive Alien
Summer, 1-6 credits, S/U grading
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Species in Tropical and Temperate
May be repeated for credit.
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
Climates
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
The course is designed to instruct students
MAR 590: Research for MS Students
in the biology and ecology of marine
MAR
598:
Synoptic
and
Mesoscale
Original investigation undertaken with the
invasive species using real examples from
Meteorology
supervision of the advisor.
the Caribbean and the temperate areas of
Course
examines
the
structure
and
evolution
Fall and Spring, 1-12 credits, S/U grading
the US Atlantic coast. Additionally, it will
of synoptic and mesoscale systems using
May be repeated for credit.
include management strategies to control
observations, modern dynamical analysis,
current invasive species, as well as strategies
and
numerical
weather
prediction
models.
MAR 592: Internship in Marine
to prevent future invasions. Topics in this
Diagnosis of synoptic systems includes
Conservation and Policy
course will span policy and legislative
Students will obtain practical work experience applications of quasi-geostrophic theory
requirements, marine conservation and
to baroclinic waves; jet stream and frontal
through an internship with local, state or
planning, scientific research, biological
circulations.
A
survey
of
the
concepts
of
federal agencies or not for profit organizations
and ecological characteristics, survey and
working in the area of marine conservation and mesoscale systems includes convective
monitoring methods, public outreach and
systems, gravity waves, and terrain-coastal
policy. To complete the internship, students
education strategies. These topics will enable
circulations.
The
student
will
investigate
will prepare a written report on their activities
the students to provide sound technical and
such phenomena in the laboratory as well as
and present their internship project at the
scientific guidance to the management and
individual projects.
annual Program Symposium.
prevention of marine invasive species in the
Spring, alternate years, 4 credits, Letter
Spring,
Wider Caribbean and the Atlantic Regions.
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Summer, 1-6 credits, S/U grading
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAR 599: Atmospheric Boundary
MAR 603: Ocean Physics Seminar
Layer Processes
MAR 593: Atmospheric Physics
This course provides the theoretical foundation This course explores topics in ocean physics
Advanced cloud physics. atmospheric
as chosen by the instructors and participants.
for a quantitative understanding of transport
convection, and other moist processes.
The seminar series is organized around themes
processes and chemical transformations
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
such as estuarine physics, or coastal dynamics,
in the atmospheric boundary layer. Topics
etc.)
ocean and climate, ocean circulation, etc.
covered in this course include the equations
Students are required to lead at least one of
of
motions
for
the
lower
troposphere;
the
MAR 594: Atmospheric Dynamics
the seminars and to participate in discussions.
budget of turbulent kinetic energy; turbulent
This course covers atmospheric waves, quasi- fluxes of momentum, heat and mass;
Prerequisite: MAR 509 or permission of
geostrophic theory, and atmospheric dynamic
treatment of chemical transformations; and the instructor Fall and spring, 1 credit, ABCF
instability.
representation of these processes in numerical grading, May be repeated for credit
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
models.
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAR 595: Graduate Seminar in
Atmospheric Sciences
Discussion of special research topics centered
on monographs, conference proceedings, or
journal articles. Topics include climate change,

MAR 601: Dynamic model with Matlab
This course is designed to provide basic
programming skills with the use of selected
Matlab toolboxes to analyze marine and

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

MAR 650: Dissertation Research for
PhD
Original investigation undertaken with the
supervision of research committee.
156

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

MAR 655: Directed Study for PhD
Individual studies under the guidance of
a faculty member. Subject matter varies
according to the needs of the student.

number fields, solutions of equations.
MAR 800: Summer Research
Summer Research. 0 credits, S/U grading. May Mathematical topics integrate the study
of the historical development of algebra,
be repeated.
including contributions from diverse cultures.
S/U grading
Prerequisite: MAT 511 Semesters Offered:
May be repeated for credit.
Fall, Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B
+, etc.)

Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

Marine Sciences - Southampton

Fall and Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

MAR-S

MAR-S 550: Topics in Marine Sciences
This is used to present special interest courses,
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
including intensive short courses by visiting
May be repeated for credit.
and adjunct faculty and courses requested by
MAR 699: Dissertation Research for G5 students. Those given in recent years include
Nature of Marine Ecosystems, Science and
Research course exclusively for students
Technology in Public Institutions, Plutonium
who have been advanced to candidacy (G5).
in the Marine Environment, and Problems in
Major portion of research must take place on
Estuarine Sedimentation.
SBU campus, at Cold Spring Harbor, or at the
Fall and Spring, 1-4 credits, Letter graded (A,
Brookhaven National Lab.
A-, B+, etc.)
Fall and Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
May be repeated for credit.
MAR 670: Practicum in Teaching

MAR 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
MAR 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
in MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.
All international students must received
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

MAR-S 570: Methods of Multivariate
Statistics in Atmospheric and Marine
Sciences
This course on multivariate statistical
methods of interest in marine and atmospheric
sciences discussesPrincipal component (EOF)
analysis, canonical correlation analysis,
maximum covariance analysis, discrimination
and classification, and cluster analysis.
Applications of the topics to oceanographic/
atmospheric data are shown using MATLAB.
The class provides a hands-on experience
requiring each student to apply the techniques
to his/her own data and the results are
discussed in class with feedback from the
instructors and other students.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MAT
Mathematics
MAT 511: Fundamental Concepts of
Mathematics
Fundamental Concepts of Mathematics.
Brief history of mathematics; sets, functions
and logic; constructions of number systems,
including their historical development;
mathematical induction. The main focus of the
course will be on the construction and writing
of mathematical proofs. Fall, Spring, or
Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MAT 512: Algebra for Teachers
Linear algebra, the algebra of polynomials,
algebraic properties of the complex numbers,

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

MAT 513: Analysis for Teachers I
Topics in differential calculus, its foundations,
and its applications. This course is
designed for teachers and prospective
teachers of advanced placement calculus.
Mathematical topics integrate the study
of the historical development of calculus,
including contributions from diverse cultures.
Prerequisite: MAT 511 Fall, Spring, or
Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MAT 514: Analysis for Teachers II
Topics in calculus, its foundations, and its
applications. Emphasis is on integration
and on numerical techniques. This course
is designed for teachers and prospective
teachers of advanced placement calculus.
Mathematical topics integrate the study of the
historical development of calculus, including
contributions from diverse cultures. Analysis
for Teachers I is not a prerequisite for this
course. Prerequisite: MAT 511 Fall, Spring, or
Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MAT 515: Geometry for Teachers
A re-examination of elementary geometry
using concepts from analysis and algebra.
Mathematical topics integrate the study of the
historical development of Euclidean and nonEuclidian geometries, including contributions
from diverse cultures. Prerequisite: MAT 511
Fall, Spring, or
Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MAT 516: Probability and Statistics for
Teachers
A priori and empirical probabilities;
conditional probability; mean and standard
deviation; random variables; financial
distributions; continuous distributions;
sampling; estimation; decision making.
Mathematical topics integrate the study of
the historical development of statistics and
probability, including contributions from
diverse cultures. Prerequisite: MAT 511 Fall,
Spring, or
Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

157

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

MAT 517: Calculators and Computers
for Teachers
Calculators and Computers for teachers.
Graphing calculators, programming,
computing and curve sketching; Geometers
Sketchpad or other computer based classroom
tools; educational use of the world wide web.

MAT 523: Analysis in Several
Dimensions
Continuity, differentiation and integration
in Euclidean n-space. Differentiable maps.
Implicit and inverse function theorems.
Differential forms and the general Stokes'
theorem.

Fall, Spring, or
Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MAT 518: Seminar on the Uses of
Mathematics
This seminar explores the ways in which
secondary school and elementary college
mathematics are used in such diverse areas
as psychology, sociology, political science,
economics, business, engineering, physics,
chemistry, biology, and medicine. Primarily
for secondary school teachers of mathematics.
Fall, Spring, or
Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MAT 519: Seminar in Mathematics in
Teaching and Learning
Seminar format. This course involves
deliberative group inquiry - through
reading, writing and intensive discussion
- into mathematics teaching, learning and
mathematics education research; analysis and
design of cognitively demanding mathematical
tasks; and analysis of students' mathematical
thinking, written responses, and common
misconceptions in the mathematics classroom.
Each student completes an action research
project focused on a topic selected with
guidance from the instructor.

MAT 524: Abstract Algebra I
Groups and rings together with their
homorphisms and quotient structures. Unique
factorization, polynomials, and fields.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAT 525: Abstract Algebra II
A continuation of MAT 524, covering modules
over rings (including the structure theorem for
Modules over Principal Ideal Domains), theory
of fields, field extensions, and an introduction
to Galois theory.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAT 526: Linear Algebra
Finite dimensional vector spaces over a field,
linear maps, isomorphisms, dual spaces,
quotient vector spaces, bilinear and quadratic
functions, inner products, canonical forms of
linear operators, multilinear algebra, tensors.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MAT 529: Basic Topology and
Geometry (for Masters Program)
A broadly based introduction to topology
and geometry, the mathematical theories
of shape, form, and rigid structure. Topics
include intuitive knot theory, lattices and
tiling, non-Euclidean geometry, smooth curves
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
and surfaces in Euclidean 3-space, open sets
and continuity, combinatorial and algebraic
MAT 520: Geometry for Teachers II
invariants of spaces, higher dimensional
Vector algebra on the plane and in the 3-space; spaces.
area and volume of geometric figures; analytic
There will be a required short paper on the
geometry. Prerequisite: MAT 511
fundamental group of a topological space or
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
some similar topic.
etc.)
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAT 521: Introduction to Number
Theory
Congruences, quadratic residues, quadratic
forms, continued fractions, Diophantine
equations, number-theoretical functions, and
properties of prime numbers.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAT 522: Introduction to Measure
Theory
Introduction to Lebesgue measure and
integration. Aspects of Fourier series, function
spaces, Hilbert spaces, Banach spaces.

MAT 530: Topology, Geometry I
Basic point set topology; connectedness,
compactness, continuity, etc. Metric
spaces, function spaces, and topological
manifolds. Introduction to algebraic topology;
fundamental group and covering space;
homology; applications.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAT 531: Topology, Geometry II
Foundations of differentiable manifolds:
differentiable maps, vector fields and flows,
and differential forms and integration on

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

manifolds. Stokes' theorem. Froebenius
theorem. Lie derivatives. Immersions and
submersions. DeRham chomology, cochain
complexes, degree of a map, Mayer-Vietoris
Theorem.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MAT 532: Real Analysis I
Ordinary differential equations; Banach
and Hilbert spaces; inverse and implicit
function theorems; Lebesque measure; general
measures and integrals; measurable functions;
convergence theorems for integrals.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAT 533: Real Analysis II
Representations and decomposition theorems
in measure theory; Fubini's theorem; L-p
spaces; Fourier series; Laplace; heat and
wave equations; open mapping and uniform
boundedness theorems for Banach spaces;
differentiation of the integral; change of
variable of integration. Spring
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAT 534: Algebra I
Groups: normal subgroups, quotient groups,
Lagrange's theorem, class formula, finite pgroups and solvable groups, Sylow's theorems,
finitely generated abelian groups. Rings
and modules: subrings, fields, prime and
maximal ideals, quotient rings, ID's, PID's,
UFD's, polynomial rings, field of fractions, the
Wedderburn theorem, Hilbert basis theorem,
finitely generated modules over a PID. Vector
spaces: basis, linear maps and matrices, dual
spaces, determinants, eigenvalues and vectors,
inner products, spectral theorem for normal
operators.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAT 535: Algebra II
Vector spaces: Cayley-Hamilton Theorem,
Jordon normal form, bilinear forms, signature,
tensor products, symmetric and exterior
algebras. Homological algebra: categories
and functors, universal and free objects, exact
sequences, extensions. Representation theory
for finite groups: irreducible representations
and Shur's Lemma, characters, orthogonality.
Galois theory: splitting fields, finite fields,
extension fields of various types, Galois
polynomial and group, fundamental theorem of
Galois theory, symmetric functions.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MAT 536: Complex Analysis I
Elementary functions, holomorphic functions.
Cauchy theory, power series, classification
158

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

of isolated singularities, calculus of residues,
open mapping theorem, Riemann mapping
theorem.

Foundational material and techniques in
complex algebraic and differential geometry:
Review of basic results in several complex
variables/analytic geometry, sheaves and
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
cohomology of sheaves, complex vector
etc.)
bundles, Chern classes, positivity, Kaehler
manifolds, projective manifolds, Hodge
MAT 537: Several Complex Variables
Definition and basic properties of holomorphic decomposition for Kaehler manifolds, Kodaira
vanishing theorem, Hard Lefschetz Theorem,
functions and mappings. Analytic sets: Basic
divisors and line bundles, Bertini's theorem,
definitions, Local theory of Weierstrass,
Meromorphic functions. Hartogs Phenomenon. Lefschetz theorem on (1,1) classes, blowing
up, Kodaira's embedding theorem.
Domains of convergence of power series.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Domains of holomorphy. Pseudoconvexity
May be repeated for credit.
and the Levi Problem. Complex manifolds,
holomorphic vector bundles and Hermitian
metrics. Cousin problems. L2 estimates for the MAT 551: Introduction to PDE
inhomogeneous Cauchy-Riemann Equations
Introduction to basic types of partial
and applications.
differential equations and techniques for
studying them. First order equations;
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
The Cauchy problem and the CauchyKovalevskaya Theorem; Laplace, heat, and
MAT 540: Advanced Topology,
wave operators; Sobolev and Holder spaces;
Geometry I
second order linear elliptic equations: weak
Homotopy, fundamental group and higher
solutions, existence and regularity theory;
homotopy groups, fiber bundles and
L^p and Schauder estimates; de Giorgicovering, homotopy exact sequences of pairs,
Nash-Moser theory; introduction to nonlinear
fiber bundles, classification of coverings,
equations" Prerequisite: MAT 531, MAT 536
CW-complexes, homotopy excision,
suspension, topological manifolds, topological
classification of 1- and 2-manifolds.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAT 541: Algebraic Topology
Singular and simplicial homology, their
properties and equivalence, calculations
for CW-complexes. Eilenberg-Steenrod
axioms, cohomology, cup and cross products,
Poincare, Lefschetz and Alexander dualities.
Prerequisites: MAT 530, MAT 531, Fall
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 544: Commutative and
Homological Algebra
An introduction to the techniques of
commutative and homological algebra useful
in algebra, algebraic geometry, number
theory, and related fields. Review of rings and
modules, tensor products and localization.
Spectrum of prime ideals, Noetherian and
Artinian rings and modules, completion,
dimension theory, local rings, discrete
valuation rings and Dedekind domains,
integral dependence. Chain complexes,
projective and injective resolutions, examples
of derived functors (Ext and Tor), basic
category theory (adjoint functors, natural
transformations, limits and colimits), abelian
categories. Prerequisite: MAT 535
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAT 545: Complex Geometry

central limit theorem, symbolic dynamics.
3)General smooth ergodic theory: Oseledec,
Pesin, Birkhof theorems. 4)Non-hyperbolic
examples: non-uniform hyperbolic examples,
homoclinic theory, Newhouse phenomenon,
aspects of unimodal dynamics, aspects of
Henon dynamics. Prerequisites: MAT 531,
MAT 533, MAT 536 3 credits. Offered in
Spring.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAT 560: Mathematical Physics I
Aimed at students affiliated with the RTG
program, topics include: Classical field
theory (Lagrangian and Hamiltonian),
electromagnetism, special relativity, statistical
mechanics and thermodynamics, quantum
mechanics and quantum field theory.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAT 561: Mathematical Physics II
Aimed at students affiliated with the RTG
program, topics include: Classical field
theory (lagrangian and Hamiltonian),
electromagnetism, special relativity, statistical
mechanics and thermodynamics, quantum
mechanics and quantum field theory.

Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MAT 552: Introduction to Lie Groups
and Lie Algebras
Lie algebras Foundations of Lie groups
and Lie algebras, classical groups and
homogeneous spaces. Abstract Lie algebras.
Basic representation theory of compact Lie
groups.

MAT 562: Symplectic Geometry
Hamilton's equations and their physical
origin, symplectic manifolds and various
submanifolds; Moser arguments including
Darboux theorem and Moser neighborhood
theorems, contact manifolds, contact
hypersurfaces, symplectizations, Legendrian
front diagrams, topological Legendrian
knot invariants, almost complex structures
compatible with symplectic form, Hamiltonian
group actions and symplectic reduction,
symplectic toric manifolds, h principle with
emphasis on holonomic approximation
theorem along with applications to symplectic
and contact geometry , Gromov non squeezing
theorem and a summary of pseudoholomorphic
curve theory. Prerequisite: MAT 531

Prerequisite: MAT 531, MAT 534
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAT 554: Harmonic Analysis
An introduction to the methods and ideas
of modern harmonic analysis, including:
Fourier series and integrals (convergence,
summability, L^p); Maximal functions, weak
type inequalities, interpolation; the Hilbert
transform; singular integrals with CalderonZygmund kernels; H^1 and Bounded Mean
Oscillation; Muckenhoupt (A_p) weights;
Multipliers; the T(1) theorem. Offered every
second year.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAT 555: Ergodic Theory and Smooth
Dynamics
This course will give an overview of the
main known topological, geometrical, and
measure theoretical phenomena of smooth
dynamics: 1) Zero entropy of dynamics: Circle
diffeomorphisms, KAM, period doubling,
renormalization. 2)Hyperbolic dynamics:
stable manifold theorem, structural stability,

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAT 566: Differential Topology
Vector bundles, transversality, and
characteristic classes. Further topics such
as imbeddings and immersions, intersection
theory, surgery, and foliations.
Prerequisite: MAT 531
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAT 568: Differential Geometry
Connections, curvature, geodesics, parallelism,
and completeness. Riemannian manifolds,
geometry of sub-manifolds; method of integral
formulas; applications to global extrinsic
159

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
theorems. Riemannian curvature. GaussBonnet theorem, Hopf-Rinow theorem.
Prerequisite: MAT 531
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MAT 569: Differential Geometry
A broad introduction to the fundamentals
of modern Riemannian geometry, including
major ideas and useful techniques: holonomy
groups, symmetric spaces; Riemannian
submersions; constructing manifolds of
non-negative sectional curvature; Ricci
and scalar curvature; Weyl curvature and
conformal geometry; harmonic forms and
the Hodge theorem; the Bochner technique;
the Bishop-Gromov inequality; the CheegerGromoll splitting theorem; Gromov-Hausdorff
convergence. Prerequisite: MAT 568
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MAT 589: Introduction to Algebraic
Geometry
This course offers a systematic introduction to
algebraic geometry, from a modern, schemetheoretic perspective. Prerequisite: MAT
536, or permission of instructor. Familiarity
with material covered by MAT 545 would be
helpful, but is not required.
3 credits, S/U grading
MAT 598: Teaching Practicum
Seminar and workshop for new teaching
assistants.
Fall, 3 credits, S/U grading
MAT 599: M.A. Research
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 602: Topics in Algebra
Typical topics are drawn from group theory,
ring theory, representation theory of groups
and algebras, fields and commutative algebra,
homological algebra.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 603: Topics in Algebra
Typical topics are drawn from group theory,
ring theory, representation theory of groups
and algebras, fields and commutative algebra,
homological algebra.

Spring 2021
equations, and transcendental number theory,
with indications of methods from algebra,
geometry, analysis, and logic.

Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

MAT 627: Topics in Complex Analysis
Topics selected from Riemann surfaces,
quasiconformal mappings, several complex
variables, Fuchsian groups, Kleinian groups,
MAT 609: Topics in Number Theory
Typical topics are drawn from analytic number moduli of Riemann surfaces and Kleinian
groups, analytic spaces, singularities.
theory, algebraic number theory, diophantine
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor MAT
equations, and transcendental number theory,
626 - Fall, MAT 627 with indications of methods from algebra,
geometry, analysis, and logic.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) May be repeated for credit.
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 614: Topics in Algebraic
Geometry
Typical topics are drawn from varieties
and schemes, algebraic curves, and their
arithmetics. Fall
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 615: Topics in Algebraic
Geometry
Typical topics are drawn from varieties
and schemes, algebraic curves, and their
arithmetics. Fall
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 620: Topics in Topology
Topics of current interest such as foliations,
surgery, singularities, group actions on
manifolds, and homotopy theory.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 621: Topics in Topology
Topics of current interest such as foliations,
surgery, singularities, group actions on
manifolds, and homotopy theory.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

MAT 626: Topics in Complex Analysis
Topics selected from Riemann surfaces,
quasiconformal mappings, several complex
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) variables, Fuchsian groups, Kleinian groups,
moduli of Riemann surfaces and Kleinian
May be repeated for credit.
groups, analytic spaces, singularities.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor MAT
MAT 608: Topics in Number Theory
Typical topics are drawn from analytic number 626 - Fall, MAT 627 theory, algebraic number theory, diophantine
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

MAT 632: Topics in Differential
Equations
Typical topics are hyperbolic or elliptic
systems, parabolic equations, spectral theory,
finite difference equations, Cauchy-Riemann
equations and complex vector fields, equations
with constant coefficients, solvability of linear
equations, Fourier integral operators, nonlinear
equations.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 633: Topics in Differential
Equations
Typical topics are hyperbolic or elliptic
systems, parabolic equations, spectral theory,
finite difference equations, Cauchy-Riemann
equations and complex vector fields, equations
with constant coefficients, solvability of linear
equations, Fourier integral operators, nonlinear
equations.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 638: Topics in Real Analysis
Topics selected from functional analysis,
harmonic analysis, Banach algebras, operator
theory. Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
MAT 638 - Fall, MAT 639 Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 639: Topics in Real Analysis
Topics selected from functional analysis,
harmonic analysis, Banach algebras, operator
theory. Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
MAT 638 - Fall, MAT 639 Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
160

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
MAT 641: Topics in Lie Groups Theory
Typical topics are universal enveloping
algebras; free, solvable and nilpotent Lie
algebras; Lie theory and formal groups; root
systems, Dynkin diagrams, classification and
representations of complex semisimple Lie
algebras; method of orbits; representations of
non-compact Lie groups; loop groups.
Prerequisite: MAT 552
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 644: Topics in Differential
Geometry
Typical topics will be drawn from areas such
as comparison theorems, pinching theorems,
Morse theory, characteristic classes, minimal
varieties, Hodge theory, spectrum of the
Laplacian, and geometry of general relativity.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Spring 2021
field theories; gauge theories and geometry
in four-dimensions; supergravity and mirror
symmetry; strings.

MAT 670: Advanced Topics in Complex
Analysis
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor

Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

MAT 670 - Fall, MAT 671 Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

MAT 655: Topics in Dynamical
Systems
Typical topics are drawn from holomorphic
and low-dimensional dynamics, hyperbolic
dynamics, theory of Hamiltonian systems,
ergodic theory, and bifurcation theory.

MAT 671: Advanced Topics in Complex
Analysis
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor

Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 656: Topics in Dynamical
Systems
Typical topics are drawn from holomorphic
and low-dimensional dynamics, hyperbolic
dynamics, theory of Hamiltonian systems,
ergodic theory, and bifurcation theory.

MAT 645: Topics in Differential
Geometry
Typical topics will be drawn from areas such
as comparison theorems, pinching theorems,
Morse theory, characteristic classes, minimal
varieties, Hodge theory, spectrum of the
Laplacian, and geometry of general relativity.

Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

MAT 662 - Fall, MAT 663 Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

MAT 648: Topics in Mathematical
Physics
Typical topics are mathematical methods of
classical and quantum mechanics; methods
of functional integration and its applications;
infinite-dimensional Lie algebras, quantum
groups and representations; conformal field
theories; super-symmetry; topological quantum
field theories; gauge theories and geometry
in four-dimensions; supergravity and mirror
symmetry; strings.

MAT 663: Advanced Topics in Algebra
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor

Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 649: Topics in Mathematical
Physics
Typical topics are mathematical methods of
classical and quantum mechanics; methods
of functional integration and its applications;
infinite-dimensional Lie algebras, quantum
groups and representations; conformal field
theories; super-symmetry; topological quantum

MAT 662: Advanced Topics in Algebra
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor

MAT 662 - Fall, MAT 663 Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 666: Advanced Topics in
Topology
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
MAT 666 - Fall, MAT 667 Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 667: Advanced Topics in
Topology
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
MAT 666 - Fall, MAT 667 Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

MAT 670 - Fall, MAT 671 Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 674: Advanced Topics in
Differential Equations
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
MAT 674 - Fall, MAT 675 Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 675: Advanced Topics in
Differential Equations
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
MAT 674 - Fall, MAT 675 Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 678: Advanced Topics in Real
Analysis
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
MAT 678 - Fall, MAT 679 Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 679: Advanced Topics in Real
Analysis
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
MAT 678 - Fall, MAT 679 Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 682: Advanced Topics in
Differential Geometry
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor MAT
682 - Fall, MAT 683 Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 683: Advanced Topics in
Differential Geometry
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor MAT
682 - Fall, MAT 683 161

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 685: Advanced Topics in
Dynamics
An advanced topic selected from holomorphic
and low-dimensional dynamics, hyperbolic
dynamics, KAM theory, smooth ergodic
theory, geodesic flows, bifurcation theory.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Spring 2021
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

MAT 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
MAT 686: Advanced Topics in
(G5). Major portion of research will take
Dynamics
place outside of the United States and/or
An advanced topic selected from holomorphic U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
and low-dimensional dynamics, hyperbolic
in MEDEX. International students who are
dynamics, KAM theory, smooth ergodic
in their home country are not covered by
theory, geodesic flows, bifurcation theory.
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
be removed. International students who are
etc.)
not in their home country are charged for the
May be repeated for credit.
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
MAT 690: Advanced topics in algebraic covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
geometry
charge will only be removed if other plan is
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) deemed comparable.
May be repeated for credit.
All international students must received
MAT 691: Advanced topics in algebraic clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
geometry
May be repeated for credit.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MAT 800: FULL TIME SUMMER RES
May be repeated for credit.
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 696: Mathematics Seminar
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 697: Mathematics Colloquium
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 698: Independent Study
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Dissertation research under direction of
advisor. Prerequisite: Advancement to
candidacy (G5). Major portion of research
must take place on SBU campus, at Cold
Spring Harbor, or at the Brookhaven National
Lab.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.
MAT 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic

include probability estimation, hypothesis
testing, and regression analysis.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MBA 504: Financial Accounting
Introduction and exploration of basic financial
accounting terminology, principles, concepts,
and their relevant business applications.
This course will include the recording,
summarization, and adjustment of financial
transactions and the preparation and
presentation of the basic financial statements.
Other topics will include valuation methods
for cash, accounts receivable, inventory and
property, plant and equipment. This course is
also offered as EMP 502.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MBA 505: Marketing
A survey course covering the foundations
of the marketing discipline. The course
is designed to give students conceptual
frameworks and tools to help firms meet
demands of the marketplace in a profitable
way. A wide range of marketing strategy
topics (e.g., segmentation, positioning) and
marketing tactics (the Four P's of Marketing
-- Product, Price, Place and Promotions)
will be covered, as well as development
of the discipline's foundations (definition,
philosophy, and the history of marketing).
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MBA 506: Leadership, Team
Effectiveness and Communications
The purpose of the course is to introduce
you to the multifaceted phenomenon of
leadership, teams, and communications. It
seeks to answer the following three questions:
What do leaders really do? What makes teams
effective? How do you create persuasive
Business Administration
communications? The course addresses
such topics as leadership styles, building
MBA 502: Finance
motivated teams, and developing strategic
How firms meet and manage their final
communications. It examines these topics
objectives. Today's financial environment,
with a goal of not only imparting knowledge
the fundamental trade-off between risk and
about evidence-based managerial practices
return, the time value of money, and valuing
but also assisting students to acquire the skills
future cash flows are discussed. Financial tools necessary to become business leaders, team
and techniques, which can be used to help
builders and articulate communicators.
firms maximize value by improving decisions
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
related to capital, are explained. Bond and
stock valuations are introduced.
MBA 507: Ethics in Management

MBA

Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MBA 503: Data Analysis and Decision
Making
An introduction to statistical techniques useful
in the analysis of management problems.
We motivate each topic by managerial
applications, and we analyze actual data sets
using modern statistical software. Topics

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

This course examines the main ethical
problems facing the modern manager.
Emphasis is placed on the moral and ethical
responsibilities that relate to investors,
employees, customers, and the community.
Students will learn the basic vocabulary of
business ethics.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
162

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
MBA 509: Continuous Quality
Improvement
This course provides students with
understanding of concepts of TQM and
quality improvement methods to attain worldclass performance in business operations.
Topics include policy deployment, process
improvement methodology, daily work
management, quality story methodology, six
sigma, poka-yoke, ISO, Deming and Baldridge
Awards criteria.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MBA 511: Technological Innovations
Innovation drives the modern firm by
the interaction of technical invention and
managerial entrepreneurship. This course
explores the variety of sources of new
products, processes, and services, such
as inventors, universities, research and
development departments in industry, and
government labs. In addition, the course
explores the variety of ways of bringing
new products, processes, and services to
market, including startup firms, acquisitions,
mergers, and entrepreneurship within the
firm. Case studies showing the interaction of
invention and entrepreneurship are analyzed.
A term project is required in which the student
either analyzes the history of invention and
entrepreneurship in a major firm or writes a
business plan for high technology startup firm.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MBA 512: Business Planning and
Strategic Management
The principles and techniques of strategic
management by which an organization sets
and implements its long-range direction.
This includes the processes of environment
scanning, self-assessment of organizational
purpose and comparative advantage, and
synthesis of organizational mission, plans, and
strategic initiatives. Extensive use is made of
case studies and in-class exercises.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MBA 515: Managing in a Global
Economy
Because both the similarities and differences
of organizations and management across
national boundaries must be a part of the
knowledge base of tomorrow's manager, this
course examines proprietorships, partnerships,
corporations, governmental regulatory
agencies, public authorities, voluntary social
services, multinational corporations, and
strategic alliances, as well as combinations

Spring 2021
of these organizations, across sectoral and
national boundaries.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MBA 517: Information Systems for
Management
Information systems and its role in strategic
planning and managerial operations in
business. The systems approach to the
analysis, design, and implementation of
information systems. Recent developments
in information technology and its impact on
existing and future information systems.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MBA 521: Industry Project
Under faculty supervision, groups of students
work for clients on management issues in
a variety of areas such as health care, MIS,
marketing, data analysis, business plans, and
the like. The course provides students with
the opportunity to apply the analytic skills
they have learned in the classroom to actual
management problems. Students also gain
practical experience in business writing, giving
formal presentations, and working in teams.
The format for the course is a combination
of work in the classroom and "lab" work.
The lab work consists of visits with a client,
developing a formal proposal, generating a
final report, and various other elements of a
professional consulting arrangement.

mediation. Students are expected to participate
in a series of workshop activities and simulated
cases to reveal how negotiation and mediation
are applied to resolving difficulties in business
management, labor relations, international
and domestic affairs, patient/doctor/hospital
relations, and other areas where negotiation
and mediation play a significant role in modern
life.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MBA 531: New Developments in
Human Resource Management
This is an advanced course, designed to
examine new developments and professional
concerns in human resource management. The
course focuses on such topics as productivity
in the American workplace; developing union/
management cooperation for productivity;
methods of training in the workplace; impact
of the computer revolution on the personnel
field; and specialized personnel needs of the
new workforce in a high-tech and service
economy.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MBA 538: Organizational Development
and Change Management
This course will acquaint students with
types of organizational change and the roles
of human resources managers as change
agents and internal consultants. Cases, group
exercises, and class discussions are used
Fall, 6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) to examine change methods, employees'
reactions to change, facilitation techniques,
and evaluation methods. Roles of leaders,
MBA 522: Industry Project
managers, employees, and human resources
Under faculty supervision, groups of students
professionals are considered. Targets of
work for clients on management issues in
change include job designs, interpersonal
a variety of areas such as health care, MIS,
relationships, downsizing/rightsizing
marketing, data analysis, business plans and
and organizational structures. Quality
the like. The course provides students with
improvement, employee involvement, and
the opportunity to apply the analytic skills
professional development are studied as
they have learned in the classroom to actual
examples of change strategies. Students learn
management problems. Students also gain
practical experience in business writing, giving how to help their co-workers cope, as well
as how to become trusted business advisors
formal presentations, and working in teams.
within the organization. This course is offered
The format for this course is a combination
as both HRM 538 and MBA 538 (formerly
of work in the classroom and "lab" work.
CEX 538). Prerequisite: MBA 532/HRM 532.
The lab work consists of visits with a client,
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
developing a formal proposal, generating a
final report and various other elements of a
MBA 540: Data Mining
professional consulting arrangement.
The recent advances in the Internet and
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
information technologies have resulted in an
explosion of demand for ¿big data¿ analytics.
MBA 530: Employee Dispute
The importance of data mining has already
Resolution and Conflict Management
been recognized widely in the industry
The methods and procedures for reaching
including many business areas, such as
negotiated agreements. Topics include
marketing science, financial analysis, and
reducing conflict and confrontation between
corporation management. In this course,
contending parties, analysis of the techniques
we will be focusing on both key concepts
of win-lose and win-win negotiation, and
and models of data mining and their

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

163

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

implementations based on real-world data in
business. Students will learn to process data
using Excel, and apply data mining models
using Weka, a data mining software.

in challenging social and business situations,
students will engage in critical thinking,
evaluation of moral standards, and display
of various ethical positions pertaining to
contemporary society and management of
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
business operations. A simulated situation as
presented in a film and supported by research
MBA 543: Business Analytics
An introduction to mathematical models useful from the humanities, will add to experiential
learning, emphasized in contemporary business
in the analysis of management problems.
education.
We motivate each topic by managerial
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
applications, and we analyze problems using
modern software. Topics include forecasting,
MBA 566: Business law
linear, nonlinear, and integer optimization,
simulation, Markov processes, decision
This course provides an understanding of
analysis, and multi-criteria decision making.
the nature of law and its role in business and
surveys some of the regulatory issues faced
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
by businesses. The law of business contracts
will be examined in depth. Other topics
MBA 544: Supply Chain Management
include property rights, bailments, and agency
and Analytics
Businesses engage in a diverse set of activities concepts, business organizations, securities
law and regulation, and laws and regulations
in their daily operations including production
impacting technology development. This
planning, resource procurement, inventory
course requires case analysis, problem solving,
management, distribution, and interaction
development of critical thinking skills, and oral
with other firms. The goal of supply chain
and written communication.
management is to maximize the economic
value of these activities through system level
coordination. A successful supply chain
streamlines the flow of materials, goods,
information, and capital along each component
of the supply chain.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MBA 548: Fundamentals of the
Bioscience Industry
A 4-module course set up to provide students
with a comprehensive introduction to the
complexities of the bioscience business
environment.

Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MBA 570: Entrepreneurship
This course helps the student develop a
business plan for his or her own business
idea or a plan for an entrepreneur. With the
support of visiting practitioners, students
take a business idea through all the planning
steps. A business plan suitable for presentation
to potential investors will be written and
presented orally at the end of the class.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Prerequisite: Must be either a BME or MBA
graduate student (West Campus). All other
students must obtain permission from the
instructor.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

MBA 571: Social Entrepreneurship
Students explore the concept of social
entrepreneurship including motivation and
skills for advocacy, entrepreneurship, and
leadership. Topics include forms of social
entrepreneurship (private, public, and notfor-profit), venture capital and fund raising,
MBA 553: Simulation and Modeling
market analysis, marketing, communications,
A comprehensive course in formulation,
implementation, and application of simulation human resources and human relations,
including negotiation and conflict resolution
models. Topics include data structures,
methods. Students will explore models of
simulation languages, statistical analysis,
pseudo-random number generation, and design corporate social responsibility, university
service to the community, and grass-roots
of simulation experiments. Students apply
ventures spawned by perceived need and the
simulation modeling methods to problems of
will to make a difference. Students work in
their own design. This course is offered as
teams to develop a strategic business plan for
CSE 529, AMS 553 and MBA 553.
their own venture and present their proposals
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
to the class.
MBA 563: Business Ethics through
Film: Thinking, Acting, Managing
Using real world business cases, and fictional
scenarios from films exemplifying behavior

Offered
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MBA 574: Project Management

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

This course will explore the theory and
practice of managing a project. We will
examine the various tools that are available
to monitor and measure managerial tasks and
to define common business processes. Every
aspect of business entails the execution of
a series of defined tasks and the associated
allocation of corporate resources. From
developing new products to implementing
customer loyalty programs, managers must
understand business processes including
their associated tasks, inter-relationships
and transformations. Project management
involves three primary activities: defining
manageable tasks, mapping their logical
flow, and creating an implementation
process. In the course, we will explore ways
to manage these functions successfully to
increase the probability of achieving desired
results. We will use the latest software tools
including: MS Project, MS Visio, @Risk
Project Simulation, Business Plan Pro 2007,
WIP Information System - online and CCommerce tools such as Instantstream. We
will use Blackboard extensively to interact
(c-commerce), post grades, assignments,
information and notices. Access Blackboard
using blackboard.sunysb.edu.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MBA 586: Virtual Communications and
Meetings
Analyzes the growth of and interaction
among wireless markets. These markets
include devices and services for wide area
broadband networks and 802.11b wireless
local area networks. Growth factors include
business strategies executed by major
firms and startups, and roles played by
government regulations and community groups
in development and delivery of network
technology. Student projects for clients
or one's own startup investigate wireless
strategies in consumer, home, commercial,
educational or health care markets.
Prerequisites: MBA 517, MGT 571, MGT580.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MBA 587: Decision Support Systems
An advanced project-oriented course
focusing on the interrelationships among
management information systems, statistics,
and management science. Both modeldriven and data-driven decision support
systems will be considered. Students will
identify an appropriate business application,
select suitable management science and
statistical methodologies, build the required
information system, and demonstrate how their
decision support system addresses the stated

164

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
management problem. Prerequisite: MBA 503
& MBA 543
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MBA 588: Database Management
Database processing is the foundation
upon which all current applications rely
and represent the repositories of business
intelligence that play a crucial role in the
strategic success or failure of a corporation.
Even though they vary in size, complexity and
organizational scope, there is an underlying
common database engine that can be
used to manipulate and analyze the stored
information. The purpose of this course is
to introduce the business professional to the
fundamental concepts of database creation,
design, application integration, maintenance,
management and subsequent analysis.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MBA 589: Operations Management
A managerial approach to the concepts,
issues, and techniques used to convert an
organization's resources into products and
services. Through the course, students will
develop an ability to understand key concepts
in operations management, analyze the
performance of systems quantitatively, gain
insights into performance characteristics,
recognize various trade-offs in operations
management decisions, and apply concepts
and analytical methods to help improve
organization¿s operational performance
Prerequisite: MBA 503, working knowledge of
probability, and statistics is necessary.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MBA 592: Organizational Behavior
An approach to understanding the behavior
of individuals in organizations is developed,
with emphasis on implications for effective
management. This approach is used to analyze
decision problems encountered in managing
human resources. Topics include individual
and group decision-making skills, recruitment
and selection, employee ability, motivation
and incentive systems, job satisfaction,
performance assessment and management,
retention, training, and employee development.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MBA 595: Individual Directed Research
in Business
Designed to accommodate independent
research projects on an individual basis with
faculty guidance.
Fall and Spring, 1-6 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Spring 2021
MBA 596: Special Topics in Business
These courses are offered on topics that are
timely and significant to the profession. The
courses are led by experts in the particular
topic.

member. Prerequisite: matriculation in MCB
graduate program or permission of instructor.
Fall and Spring, 1-4 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)

MCB 510: Experimental Molecular &
Cellular Biology
An introduction to modern biochemical
research techniques. The student spends a half
MBA 599: Internship Practicum
Designed to accommodate College of Business term in the laboratory of each of four different
members of the staff selected in consultation
MBA graduate students working on their
with the course director. In each laboratory
internship project requirement while under
the student participates in some aspect of
supervision of an advisor.
the ongoing research pursued by the faculty
Fall, Spring and
member. Prerequisite: matriculation in MCB
Summer, 0-1 credits, S/U grading
graduate program or permission of instructor.
May be repeated for credit.
Fall and Spring, 1-4 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
MBA 800: Summer Research
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.

May be repeated for credit.

MCB
Molecular and Cellular Biology
MCB 500: Directed Readings in
Molecular and Cellular Biology
Directed readings in topics of current interest,
under supervision of a faculty sponsor.
Prerequisite: matriculation in MCB graduate
program or permission of instructor.
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MCB 503: Molecular Genetics
Introduces the classical work and current
developments in lower and higher genetic
systems. Covers gene structure and regulation
in prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms,
mutational analysis and mapping, transposable
elements, and biological DNA transfer
mechanisms. Bacteriophage as well as lower
and higher eukaryotic systems are used
to illustrate aspects of molecular genetic
structure and function. This course is offered
as both MCB 503 and HBM 503. Prerequisite:
matriculation in graduate program or
permission of instructor
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MCB 509: Experimental Molecular &
Cellular Biology
An introduction to modern biochemical
research techniques. The student spends a half
term in the laboratory of each of four different
members of the staff selected in consultation
with the course director. In each laboratory
the student participates in some aspect of
the ongoing research pursued by the faculty

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

MCB 517: Biomembranes
Examines the molecular architecture of
membranes; the structure, organization,
functions, and assembly of lipids and proteins
in biological membranes.
Prerequisite: Matriculation in Graduate
Program or permission of instructor.
Fall, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MCB 520: Graduate Biochemistry I
Several topics in modern biochemistry are
treated at an advanced level. Topics covered
will include protein structure, enzyme kinetics
and mechanisms, and enzyme regulation.
Prerequisite: undergraduate biochemistry
course, matriculation in graduate program or
permission of instructor
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MCB 531: Graduate Seminar in
Molecular & Cellular Biology
Seminars are given by graduate students
on current literature in the fields of
biochemistry, molecular biology, cell biology
or developmental biology. Prerequisite:
matriculation in graduate program or
permission of instructor.
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MCB 532: Graduate Seminar in
Molecular & Cellular Biology
Seminars are given by graduate students
on current literature in the fields of
biochemistry, molecular biology, cell biology
or developmental biology. Prerequisite:
matriculation in graduate program or
permission of instructor
Spring, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 3 times FOR credit.
MCB 550: Entering Mentoring

165

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
This seminar series is designed for graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers of
biology who may become science faculty.
The goal is to help them become effective
mentors through discussions, collective
experiences, and novel strategies to improve
mentoring skills. This course is comprised
of eight one-hour sessions in which topics
related to the role and responsibilities of a
mentor are discussed. Topics touch on ethical,
intellectual, personal, and interpersonal issues
that are associated with effective mentoring.
Prerequisite: Must be MCB graduate student
or permission of instructor. Summer only, 1
credit, S/U grading
1 credit, S/U grading

Spring 2021
MCB 603: Student Seminar in
Molecular and Cellular Biology
Seminars given by MCB graduate students
on the progress of their own thesis research.
Required of all students every term in which
they are registered in Graduate Studies
in Molecular Biology and Biochemistry.
Attendance is mandatory. Visitors welcome.
Prerequisite: matriculation in MCB graduate
program or permission of instructor.
Fall, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MCB 604: Student Seminar in
Molecular and Cellular Biology
Seminars given by MCB graduate students
on the progress of their own thesis research.
Required of all students every term in which
they are registered in Graduate Studies
in Molecular Biology and Biochemistry.
Attendance is mandatory. Visitors welcome.
Prerequisite: matriculation in MCB graduate
program or permission of instructor.

MCB 555: Big Data in Biology
An introduction to big data in biology, with an
emphasis on the concepts, research questions,
methods, and data analysis. Particular
emphasis is placed on sequencing methods
and analysis, genomics, transcriptomics,
proteomics, cellular networks, high-throughput
Fall, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
phenotyping, and systems genetics.
May be repeated for credit.
2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MCB 656: Cell Biology
Introduction to the structural and functional
MCB 599: Dissertation Research
organization of cells and tissues and to
Original investigation under the supervision
the way structure relates to function.
of a member of the staff. Prerequisite:
Particular emphasis is placed on nuclear and
matriculation in MCB graduate program or
chromosomal structure, signal transduction,
permission of instructor.
protein translocation, the cytoskeleton and
the extracellular matrix. The interaction of
Fall and Spring, 1-12 credits, S/U grading
cellular structures and components and their
May be repeated for credit.
regulation is stressed as is the organization
MCB 601: Colloquium in Molecular and and interaction of cells in tissues. The course
Cellular Biology
is comparative and includes examples of cells
and tissues from vertebrates, invertebrates,
A weekly series of talks and discussions by
plants, and prokaryotic systems. Prerequisite:
visiting scientists covering current research
matriculation in graduate program or
and thinking in various aspects of molecular
permission of instructor.
and cellular biology. Required for all MCB
graduate students. Attendance is mandatory.
Spring, 3-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
Visitors welcome. Prerequisite: matriculation
etc.)
in MCB graduate program or permission of
May be repeated for credit.
instructor.
MCB 657: Principles of Development
Fall and Spring, 0-1 credits, S/U grading
This course deals with developing systems
May be repeated for credit.
at all levels from the morphological to the
MCB 602: Colloquium in Molecular and molecular. Illustrative material from both
Cellular Biology
animal and plant kingdoms is used. Special
attention is given to gametogenesis, genetic
A weekly series of talks and discussions by
control of early development, transcriptional
visiting scientists covering current research
and translational control of protein synthesis,
and thinking in various aspects of molecular
the role of cell division and cell movements,
and cellular biology. Required for all MCB
and cell-to-cell interactions in defining
graduate students. Attendance is mandatory.
developing systems.
Visitors welcome. Prerequisite: matriculation
in MCB graduate program or permission of
Prerequisite: MCB 656, matriculation in
instructor.
graduate program or permission of instructor.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Spring, 0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

MCB 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research must take
place on SBU campus, at Cold Spring
Harbor, or at the Brookhaven National Lab.
Prerequisite: matriculation in MCB graduate
program or permission of instructor.
Fall and Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
MCB 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5), matriculation in MCB graduate program
or permission of instructor. Major portion of
research will take place off-campus, but in the
United States and/or U.S. provinces. Please
note, Brookhaven National Labs and the Cold
Spring Harbor Lab are considered on-campus.
All international students must enroll in one
of the graduate student insurance plans and
should be advised by an International Advisor.
Prerequisite: matriculation in MCB graduate
program or permission of instructor.
Fall and Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
MCB 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5) in MCB graduate program or permission
of instructor. Major portion of research will
take place outside of the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Domestic students have
the option of the health plan and may also
enroll in MEDEX. International students who
are in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver by second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.
All international students must receive
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall and Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
MCB 800: Summer Research
Prerequisite: matriculation in MCB graduate
program or permission of instructor.
Summer, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

MEC
166

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

Mechanical Engineering

tools for reducing energy consumption;
ASHRAE codes; building controls; BACnet.

MEC 500: Modeling and Control of
Manufacturing Systems
Introduction to manufacturing system
modeling and analysis. Fundamental
principles of production systems. Analytical
and simulation approach to production
system performance analysis, continuous
improvement, and design. Topics include
mathematical modeling of production
systems, production lines with various
statistic distribution models of machine
reliability, improvement analysis and realtime decision making. Includes both the
relevant fundamental concepts and the
extensive practical knowledge base on which
manufacturing research, development, and
design depend. The students are expected to
complete a project, in which they will interpret
real-life manufacturing plant operation in
the light of course principles and suggest
improvement solutions.

Prerequisite: B.S. in mechanical engineering
or related fields
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MEC 501: Convective Heat Transfer
and Heat Exchange
Differential and integral formulation. Exact
and approximate solutions. Topics include
parallel and boundary layer flows, similarity
solutions, external and internal flows, laminar
and turbulent convection, and forced and free
convection.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MEC 502: Conduction and Radiation
Heat Transfer
Heat conduction and conservation laws;
formulation of conduction equations in
differential and integral forms; analytical
solution techniques including Laplace
transforms and separation of variables; scaling
analysis; black body radiation, Kirchoff's law,
analysis of heat conduction problems; analysis
of radiative exchange between surfaces and
radiative transport through absorbing, emitting,
and scattering media.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MEC 506: Energy Management in
Commercial Buildings
Topics include basic heating, ventilating, and
air-conditioning (HVAC) system design and
selection for commercial buildings (includes
both low-rise and high-rise buildings);
selection of central plant components and
equipment; calculation of space heating
and cooling load; computer techniques for
estimating annual energy consumption; design

MEC 507: Mathematical Methods in
Engineering Analysis I
An introduction to the use of mathematical
analysis techniques for the solution of
engineering analysis problems and the
simulation of engineering systems. Both
continuous and discrete methods are covered.
Initial and boundary value problems for
ordinary and partial differential equations are
treated.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MEC 508: Mathematical Methods in
Engineering Analysis II
A continuation of the material covered in
MEC 507. Introduction to and application
of numerical analysis techniques used in
engineering such as finite elements and
fast Fourier transforms. Determination of
response characteristics of dynamic systems.
Combinatoric methods and techniques for
optimization of engineering design and
systems/process analysis problems.
Prerequisite: MEC 507
Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

as a graphical representational design
technique. The course follows the evolution
of programming ideas from the use of a single
function to the use of structural charts and
functions to modularize and finally to the use
of object-oriented programming.
Prerequisite: B.S. in science or engineering
Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MEC 511: Mechanics of Perfect Fluids
Lagrangian and Eulerian frames. Dynamical
equations of momentum and energy transfer.
Two-dimensional dynamics of incompressible
and barotropic perfect fluids and of the
compressible perfect gas. Conformal mapping
applied to two-dimensional fluid dynamics.
Jets and cavities. Surface waves, internal
waves. Perfect shear flows.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MEC 512: Mechanics of Viscous Fluids
The role of viscosity in the dynamics of
fluid flow. The Navier-Stokes equations,
low Reynolds number behavior including
lubrication theory, percolation through porous
media, and flow due to moving bodies.
High Reynolds number behavior including
steady, unsteady, and detached boundary
layers, jets, free shear layers, and wakes.
Phenomenological theories of turbulent shear
flows are introduced.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MEC 509: Transport Phenomena
Introduction to differential and integral
formulation of mass, momentum, and
energy transport in fluids and solids. Topics
include viscosity, laminar flow, turbulent
flows, conduction, convection, heat transfer
coefficients, radiation, boundary layers,
diffusion, and applications to energy
technology.
Offered
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MEC 510: Object-Oriented
Programming for Scientists and
Engineers
Practical introduction to C++ and objectoriented programming for a first programming
course for scientists and engineers. Covers
basics of application software development
such as problem decomposition, structure
charts, object modeling, class diagrams,
incremental code building, and testing at a
beginner's level. Features the concepts of
abstract data types (ADT), encapsulation,
inheritance, composition, polymorphism,
operator and function overloading besides
studying UML (Unified Modeling Language)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

MEC 514: Advanced Fluid Mechanics:
Introduction to Turbulence
Introductory concepts and statistical
descriptions: kinematics of random velocity
fields; equations of motion; experimental
techniques: isotropic turbulence, closure
problem; transport processes.
Prerequisite: MEC 512
Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MEC 516: Energy Technologies
Laboratory
Experiments in the areas of infrared imaging,
heat pumps, batteries/power electronics,
solar thermal, thermal conductivity, and
insulation. The focus is on system efficiencies,
system integration, and design for residential
markets. The fundamentals of the relevant
technologies will be presented and utilized
in the laboratory sessions. Student groups
are assigned laboratory projects focused on
applying various energy technologies to solve
engineering problems.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

167

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
MEC 517: Energy Technologies
Laboratory II
Experiments in the areas of thermoelectric
power, fuel cells, photovoltaics, wind turbines,
hydrogen storage, hydrogen generation, and
power electronics in addition to related project
work. The focus is on system efficiencies,
system integration, and design for residential
markets. Student groups are assigned
laboratory projects to build experience
applying various energy technologies to solve
problems.

Spring 2021
passing through it during the day and the heat
loss during the night time. Major equipment
include lighting, air circulation system, cooling
and heating equipment, solar thermal panels
and solar PV panels, and other equipment
including integrated electric and control units.
Of the comfort requirements only temperatureand-humidity and illumination are studied with
the objective of creating, through a systemunderstanding of the building, buildings that
in the short run meet these requirements
involving minimal use of energy and in
the long run are benchmarked against the
environmentally regenerative capabilities of
wilderness.

the development of any particular class of
products, but the focus will be mainly on
mechanical and electromechanical devices and
systems. As part of the course, each participant
will select an appropriate project to practice
the application of the material covered in the
course and prepare a final report.
Prerequisites: Undergraduate electrical
or mechanical engineering and/or science
training.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MEC 526: Modern Power Cycles
First and second law design and analysis of
modern power cycles including Rankin Steam
Offered in Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, Cycles, Bryton Gas Turbine cycles, Combined
MEC 518: Energy Harvesting
A-, B+, etc.)
Cycles, Cogeneration, Central Heat and Power
MEC 518 Energy Harvesting is designed to
Generation (CHP), Tri-generation and current
systematically disseminate recent advances
MEC 523: Internal Combustion Engines advances in thermal power systems design
in various energy harvesting technologies
Combustion fundamentals. Carnot cycle;
and analysis. Cycle efficiency and factors
in the last decade. The topic will include
effecting performance and plant efficiency.
mechanical vibrations, piezoelectric materials, reversible internal combustion engine cycle;
introduction
to
practical
internal
combustion.
Thermodynamic analysis of proposed as well
electromagnetic transducers, thermoelectric
engine cycles. Internal combustion piston
as existing thermal energy systems.
materials, electromechanical system design,
engines; engine combustion and emission
power electronics, and control, as well as the
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
processes; engine operating characteristics.
applications of energy harvesting to vehicles,
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
Gas turbine engines. Composite engines:
transportations, civil structures, and ocean
turbocharging piston engines; gas generator
MEC 527: Introduction to Building
waves.
engines; turbocompounding engines. Method
Energy Modeling
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
of exhaust heat recovery for improvement of
Designing high performance buildings requires
thermal efficiency. Method of intercoolingthe application of building energy modeling
MEC 521: Thermodynamics
supercharging for thermal efficiency
(BEM) that uses computer-based software to
This course begins with a review of the
improvement.
simulate thermal processes in buildings. In
fundamental concepts and laws of classical
applying building energy modeling, this course
thermodynamics. Then the thermostatic theory 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
emphasizes the importance of formulating the
of equilibrium states and phase transitions is
MEC 524: Computational Methods for
problem in terms of assumptions: The two
treated, followed by the thermodynamic theory
Fluid Mechanics and Heat Transfer
alternative assumptions are the static building
of processes of simple systems and composite
systems, including heat engines. Special topics Introduction of finite difference, finite volume, load assumption and the dynamic building
and finite element methods for incompressible process assumption. The resistor-capacitor (RC
may include istatisical thermodynamics,
flows and heat transfer. Topics include explicit model is introduced. With a 3D building model
irreversible thermodynamics, radiation and
and implicit schemes, accuracy, stability
developed in Autodesk Revit, energy analysis
photovoltaic energy conversion,, biological
and
convergence,
derived
and
primitiveis carried out with a series of software. Popular
thermodynamic processes, and other topics of
variables
formulation,
orthogonal
and
nonwhole-building energy simulation programs,
current interest.
orthogonal coordinate systems. Selected
such as EnergyPlus and TRNSYS, are then
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
computer assignments from heat conduction,
explained briefly.
etc.)
incompressible flows, forced and free
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
convection.
MEC 522: Building Energy Dynamics
MEC 529: Introduction to Robotics:
Prerequisite: MEC 507
and Technology
Theory and Applications
Building is treated as a time-dependent energy Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A,
A-,
B+,
etc.)
Topics: robot components and mechanatronic
system, with its interactive components
aspects of robotics (sensors, actuators, and
coupled through energy and mass flows under
MEC 525: Product Design Concept
effectors, system integration); rotation,
an environment defined in terms of sunlight,
Development and Optimization
translation, rigid-body transform; robotics
ambient air and wind and with its equipment
This graduate course will concentrate on the
foundations in kinematics and inverse
which assist in meeting building-dwellers
design
concept
development
of
the
product
kinematics, dynamics, serial and parallel
comfort requirements. Major components
development cycle, from the creative phase of manipulators and their duality, introduction
discussed are thermal mass (both interior
solution development to preliminary concept
to mobile robots and LEGO Robotics,
mass and envelope mass) and their thermal
evaluation
and
selection.
The
course
will
then
control theories, motion planning, trajectory
capacities, building envelopes and their heat
cover
methods
for
mathematical
modeling,
generation, grasping and manipulation, robotic
transfer resistances, room air including its
computer simulation and optimization. The
programming language, industrial robotics,
circulation and heat exchange with thermal
mass, and the transparent part of the envelope concept development component of the course manufacturing automation, and societal
will also cover intellectual property and patent impacts. Include hands-on projects.
the glazing or windows and the solar system
issues. The course will not concentrate on
Offered in Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

168

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

Theory of finite element methods and their
application to structural analysis problems.
Matrix operations, force and displacement
MEC 530: Applied Stress Analysis
methods. Derivation of matrices for bars,
beams, shear panels, membranes, plates,
Advanced mechanics of solids and structures.
Elastic boundary value problems are analyzed and solids. Use of these elements to model
actual structural problems. Weighted residual
with various solution techniques including
techniques and extension of the finite element
finite element method. Major topics are
method into other areas such as heat flow
stress and strain, FEM formulations, material
behavious, 2D elastic problems, stress function and fluid flow. Laboratory sessions introduce
use of the computer in solving finite element
and fracture. Detailed studies of structural
problems. Programs for the solution of force
components are carried out with FEM with
and displacement method problems are
emphasis on optimal mesh design and proper
configured. A computer project consisting of
interpretations of computed results.
the solution and evaluation of a structural
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
problem is required.
Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
MEC 532: Vibration and Control
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Fundamentals of vibrations and control of
vibrations of structures and dynamic systems.
MEC 540: Mechanics of Engineering
Topics include one dof systems and responses,
Structures
frequency response, multiple dof systems and
An introduction to variational principles
responses, relevant classical control theory,
of mechanics and the development of
modern state-space feedback control theory,
application of control methodology in systems approximation methods for the solution of
structural mechanics problems. Linear and
with dynamics and vibration, eigenvalue
nonlinear theories of beams and thin plates
problems and modal analysis, vibration
are developed along with their framework
analysis of various continuous systems.
for numerical solutions. An introduction of
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
the general theory of structural stability is
presented along with its application to the
MEC 536: Mechanics of Solids
buckling and initial postbuckling behavior of
A unified introduction to the fundamental
beams and plates.
principles, equations, and notation used in
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
finite deformation of solids, with emphasis
on the physical aspects of the subject.
MEC 541: Elasticity
Cartesian tensor representation of stress,
principal values, finite strain, and deformation. Formulation of boundary value problems.
Conservation of mass, momentum, and energy. Compatibility equations and reciprocal
theorem. Torsion of noncircular cross-sections.
Formulation of stress-strain relations in
elasticity, and compatibility relations. The use Fundamental solutions for two- and threedimensional domains. Potential function
of general orthogonal coordinate systems in
formulations. Use of integral transforms and
the equations governing solids. Principles of
complex variable approaches. Formulation and
virtual displacement and virtual work.
solution of problems in thermoelasticity.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Prerequisite: MEC 536
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
MEC 537: Combustion Research
etc.)
Laboratory
Experimental methods for testing and
development of internal combustion engines.
Methods for measuring engine performance
and emissions. Review of combustion
chemistry and thermodynamics. Engine cycle
quantities measurements. Students will apply
these methods to reciprocating engines and gas
turbines.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MEC 543: Plasticity
Stress and deformation of solids: yield criteria
and flow rules for plasticity deforming solids;
the notion of a stable inelastic material; static
and dynamic analysis of plastic bodies under
mechanical and thermal loading; use of load
bounding theorems and the calculation of
collapse loads of structures; the theory of the
slip-line field.

Prerequisite: MEC 541
MEC 539: Introduction to Finite
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
Element Methods
(formerly Finite Element Methods in Structural (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Analyses)
MEC 550: Mechatronics

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

An introduction to the design, modeling,
analysis and control of mechatronic systems
(smart systems comprising mechanical,
electrical, and software components).
Fundamentals of the basic components needed
for the design and control of mechatronic
systems, including sensors, actuators, data
acquisition systems, microprocessors,
programmable logic controllers, and I/O
systems, are covered. Hands-on experience in
designing and building practical mechatronic
systems are provided through integrated lab
activities.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MEC 552: Mechanics of Composite
Materials
The course is concerned with the analysis
of layered composite materials subject to
mechanical loads. Cartesian tensor calculus
is used. Homogeneous anisotropic media are
studied first. The effect of layering is then
analyzed. Applications to plates and shell are
studied and analytical methods of solution are
given. Numerical analysis of composite solids
is also considered using finite difference and
finite element methods.
Prerequisite: MEC 536
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MEC 556: Introduction to Engineering
Mechanics of Composites
Introduction to the engineering mechanics
of fiber reinforced composites. Brief history
of the development of fiber composites,
their properties, advantages, limitations and
applications. Overview of the different types
of composites but with focus on long fiber
reinforced composites; particularly, lamina
and laminate concepts characteristics and
configurations. Topics covered include:
elastic properties of unidirectional lamina,
strength of unidirectional lamina, elastic
behavior of multidirectional laminates and
stress and failure of multidirectional laminates.
Design methodologies and considerations for
structural composite materials. The students
are expected to complete a project, in which
they will design a real-life structural part out of
composite materials using course principles.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MEC 557: Introduction to Fiber
Composites Fabrication and
Characterization
Overview of fiber reinforced composites,
applications and mechanical properties.
Introduction to fiber composites fabrication
methods as well as experimental
characterization methods used in acquiring
their relevant mechanical properties.
169

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

Fabrication topics include: Impregnation of
fibers; Prepregs; Stacking; Curing; Vacuum
bagging; Autoclave technology; Out-ofautoclave manufacturing processes; Molding;
Processing; Cutting and Joining. Topics
in mechanical characterization include:
Experimental methods; Characterization of
the elastic properties and failure strengths of
unidirectional lamina; Characterization of
the elastic properties and failure strengths of
multidirectional laminates. Course is divided
into in-class lectures and laboratory sessions.
The students are expected to complete a
project, in which they will design, fabricate
and test a real-life structural part made out of
composite materials using course principles.

MEC 567: Kinematic Analysis and
Synthesis of Mechanisms
Introduction, mechanism structure, basic
concepts of mechanisms, canonical
representation of motion. Kinematic analysis,
algebraic method, vector-loop method,
complex number method, spherical and
spatial polygon method, matrix method,
dual-number quaternion method, screw
coordinate method, line coordinate method,
motor algebra method, type synthesis, number
synthesis, coupler curves, curvature theory
path generation, finite displacement theory,
rigid body guidance, function generation,
computer-aided mechanisms analysis and
synthesis.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

MEC 560: Advanced Control Systems
Analytical methods applied to the design
of multivariable linear control systems.
Introduction to linear system theory:
linearization, solution of linear matrix
differential equations, stability, controllability,
observability, transformations to canonical
forms. Formulation of control objectives.
Deterministic state observer. Full-state
feedback control based on pole assignment
and linear quadratic optimization theory.
Linear systems with stochastic inputs and
measurement noise. The response of linear
systems to random input; stochastic state
estimator (Kalman filter); separation principle
of stochastic control and estimation; system
robustness.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MEC 564: Fundamentals of
Aerodynamics
Kinematics and dynamics of incompressible
irrotational flow; stream function and the
potential functions; Euler and Bernoulli
equations. This-foil theory; lift and moment
for symmetric and cambered airfoils. Finitewing theory; induced drag. Compressible
flow, small disturbance theory; thin wings at
subsonic and supersonic speeds.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MEC 565: Aerospace Propulsion
Fundamentals of propulsion; performance
parameters, thermodynamic cycles.
Introduction to combustion and combustors.
Performance and cycle analysis of various
flight propulsion systems: turbojets, turbofans,
turboprops, ramjets, scramjets, rockets,
propellers. Design of supersonic inlet nozzles,
component matching and map.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MEC 568: Advanced Dynamics
Newtonian and Lagrangian mechanics of rigid
bodies; kinematics, inertia tensor, principle of
momentum, principle of virtual work, potential
and kinetic energy, equations of motion,
extraction of information from the equations
of motion, and application to engineering
problems.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MEC 570: Introduction to Engineering
Tribology
Focus is on the fundamentals of tribology,
the science of surfaces in relative motion,
with an introduction to friction, lubrication,
and wear. The basics of tribology science:
engineering surfaces, contact mechanics,
lubrication theory, wear processes and
modeling, wear properties of materials,
and tribology test methods will be covered.
Analysis of tribological aspects of machine
components and bearings. Industrial case
studies will be presented to place the topics in
context to industry and society.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MEC 571: Analysis and Design of
Robotic Manipulators
Introduction to robot manipulators from
the mechanical viewpoint, emphasizing
fundamentals of various mechanisms and
design considerations. Kinematics on 2D and
3D manipulators; statics and dynamics; motion
planning; control fundamentals; algorithms
development; computer-graphics simulation of
manipulators; current applications.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

MEC 572: Computer-Aided Design of
Shapes and Motions
This class would focus on presenting a
unifying treatment for the design of geometric
shapes, such as curves and surfaces as well
as motions of entities, such as lines, planes,
and rigid bodies. It will be shown that in the
language of projective geometry, one can
design curves, surface, and motions utilizing
same algorithms and similar data structures.
In the process, the students will learn the
theory of NURBS (Non- Uniform Rational Bsplines), which is the standard representation
in existing CAD/CAM system, and extend
it to the space of rigid body displacements
for the design of motions. Students will
implement shape and motion design algorithms
in graphical computer programs.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MEC 575: Introduction to Micro
Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS)
An introduction to the fundamental knowledge
and experience in the design and manufacture
of microsystems. Emphasis will be placed on
the methodologies for design, fabrication, and
packaging of microsystems. An overview on
fabrication and manufacturing technologies for
producing microsystems will also be covered.
Interdisciplinary nature of MEMS will be
emphasized via various engineering principles
ranging from mechanical and electrical
to materials and chemical engineering.
Introduction of the working principles of micro
actuators, sensors, and transducers.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MEC 579: Optical Measurement
Introduction to optical measurement and its
applications to the fields of solid mechanics,
design and manufacturing, and thermal and
fluid systems. Topics include fundamentals
of optics, lasers, and detectors, dimensional
and surface metrology, machine vision,
measurement of temperature, concentration,
and density, and optical techniques for stress
analysis and nondestructive testing.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MEC 585: Total Quality Management
Concepts of TQM and quality improvement
methods to attain world-class performance
in business operations. Topics include
policy deployment, process improvement
methodology, daily work management, quality
story methodology, six sigma, poka-yoke, ISO,
Deming and Baldridge Awards criteria.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
170

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
MEC 596: Projects in Mechanical
Engineering
Conducted jointly by graduate students and
one or more members of the faculty.
1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MEC 597: Graduate Research and
Study in Manufacturing
Independent research or project in the area of
manufacturing processes or systems.
1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MEC 599: Research
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-12 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.
MEC 630: Special Topics in Fluid
Mechanics
TThe subject matter of each special topics
course varies from semester to semester,
depending on the interests of students and
staff. Advanced topics and specialized topics
will be discussed, particularly those of current
interest.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MEC 631: Special Topics in Heat
Transfer
The subject matter of each special topics
course varies from semester to semester,
depending on the interests of students and
staff. Advanced topics and specialized topics
will be discussed, particularly those of current
interest.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MEC 633: Special Topics in
Thermodynamics
The subject matter of each special topics
course varies from semester to semester,
depending on the interests of students and
staff. Advanced topics and specialized topics
will be discussed, particularly those of current
interest.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MEC 634: Advanced Topics in
Kinematics and Dynamics of Machines
The subject matter of each special topics
course varies from semester to semester,
depending on the interests of students and
staff. Advanced topics and specialized topics
will be discussed, particularly those of current
interest.

Spring 2021
May be repeated for credit.
MEC 635: Advanced Topics in
Nonlinear Dynamic Systems
The subject matter of each special topics
course varies from semester to semester,
depending on the interests of students and
staff. Advanced topics and specialized topics
will be discussed, particularly those of current
interest.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MEC 656: Aerospace Propulsion
Fundamentals of propulsion; performance
parameters, thermodynamic cycles.
Introduction to combustion and combustors.
Performance and cycle analysis of various
flight propulsion systems: turbojets, turbofans,
ramjets, scramjets, rockets, propellers. Design
of supersonic inlet nozzles, component
matching and map.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MEC 636: Advanced Topics in
Mechanical Vibration
The subject matter of each special topics
course varies from semester to semester,
depending on the interests of students and
staff. Advanced topics and specialized topics
will be discussed, particularly those of current
interest.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

MEC 662: Advanced Vibration and
Analysis
Principle and techniques of vibration analysis
of structures and machines. Includes free
and forced vibration responses of linear
limped-parameter, multiple dof systems;
model analysis of distributed, continuous
systems; non-linear vibration analysis; random
vibrations.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MEC 637: Special Topics in Precision
Engineering
The subject matter of each special topics
course varies from semester to semester,
depending on the interests of students and
staff. Advanced topics and specialized topics
will be discussed, particularly those of current
interest.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MEC 641: Fracture Mechanics
The mechanics of brittle and ductile fracture
in engineering materials are studied. Major
subjects are linear elastic fracture, elasticplastic fracture, and fatigue crack analysis.
Topics also include stress intensity factor,
energy release rate, J-integ.
Prerequisite: MEC 536,
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MEC 651: Advanced Finite Element
Analysis
Finite element method for the analysis of
continuous media. In-depth discussion of
penalty method, integration techniques,
and differential equation solvers. Computer
implementation of finite element code in
nonlinear elastic, elastic-plastic materials,
and dynamic problems. Major topics are
2-D and 3D element formulations, stress
update algorithms, Newton-Raphson
iterative technique, and explicit/implicit time
integration schemes.
Prerequisites: MEC 541, MEC 539

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

MEC 691: Mechanical Engineering
Seminar
This course is designed to expose students
to cutting-edge research and development
activities in mechanical engineering. Speakers
are invited from both on and off campus. Fall
and spring. 0 credits, S/U grading. May be
repeated.
S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
MEC 695: Mechanical Engineering
Internship
Participation in off-campus engineering
practice in private corporations, public
agencies, or non-profit institutions. Students
will be required to have faculty coordinator
as well as a contact in outside organization, to
participate with them in regular consultations
on the project, and to submit a final report to
both. A maximum of 3 credits can be accepted
toward the M.S. degree.
Fall, 1 credit, S/U grading
May be repeated 3 times FOR credit.
MEC 696: Special Problems in
Mechanical Engineering
Conducted jointly by graduate students and
one or more members of the faculty.
1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MEC 697: Practicum in Teaching I
Every TA must register for the course
Fall, Spring, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
171

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
MEC 698: Practicum in Teaching II
Practicum in teaching under faculty
supervision
1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
MEC 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Prerequisite: Advancement to candidacy (G5).
Major portion of research must take place on
SBU campus, at Cold Spring Harbor, or at the
Brookhaven National Lab.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.
MEC 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
MEC 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
in MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.
All international students must received
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
MEC 800: Full Time Summer Research
May be repeated for credit.

MKT
Marketing

Spring 2021
MKT 516: Strategic Brand Management
Highly interactive course. Hands-on, practical
exploration of product, service, and enterprisewide brand building and management. Course
is structured along daily responsibilities and
challenges faced by working brand/marketing
managers and will provide experience with
proven strategies for building successful
brands in the competitive marketplace,
the decisions and options faced by brand
managers, and the tools to effectively manage
brands.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MKT 518: Principles of Sales
Management
This course prepares students to manage a
sales force. Through lectures, discussions,
assignments, and case analysis, students will
understand principles and best procedures of
sales force management as they apply to both
small and large organizations.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MKT 519: Social Media Marketing
Strategy
Social Media Marketing Strategy covers
theoretical and practical perspectives for
developing and implementing social media
marketing strategies. The course is designed
to expose students to state-of-the-art practices
in social media marketing with an emphasis
on leveraging insights from social media to
inform strategic firm decisions.

behavior. We will first examine arguments for
marketing being used as a force for bad or as a
force for good before exploring concepts and
theories from the behavioral sciences including
psychological, sociological, economic, and
cultural perspectives and analyzing their
usefulness for promoting public welfare. By
the end of the course, students will propose
a comprehensive social marketing plan for
enhancing consumer welfare in their domain of
interest.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MKT 535: New Product Development
New products are a very important part of
most all modern companies, particularly those
having to compete on a global level. This
course looks at the specific challenges in
both coming up (conceptualization, design,
and development) with new products and
how to market them to different marketplace
segments. Target marketing techniques
and quantitative and qualitative approaches
to assessing markets and product/market
fits will be examined in depth. This course
will incorporate a combination of formats including lectures, computer labs, and team
projects. It is recommended that Marketing
Research be taken before this course.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MKT 565: Consumer Insights
Marketing is the business function that deals
with customers¿ needs and wants. Thus,
an essential component of marketing is
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
understanding consumers and to develop a
MKT 521: Industry Project in Marketing deep understanding of consumers¿ needs
and wants, you need to conduct marketing
The Industry Project course in Marketing is a
research. Psychological and social science
capstone course that facilitates the transition
research has produced numerous theoretical
from University to the workplace through
and technological advances that offer access
the development of a "real world" semester
to the inner workings of the mind, providing
long client project which is mentored by a
marketers with research tools to more
faculty supervisor. Students will work in
effectively discover and fulfill consumer
teams to learn how to manage themselves and
needs. This course provides an overview of the
others when developing solutions to real world
marketing, psychological, and social science
business problems. Students will enhance their
knowledge relevant to consumer behavior
leadership skills as well as conduct research,
and also provides an introduction to research
analyze information, and present their findings.
methods for marketers to utilize when pursuing
The format of the course will be a combination
organizational goals. In this course, students
of classroom work and independent work in
will learn about qualitative and quantitative
the form of consulting and site visits with
marketing techniques such as how to conduct
the client. The course culminates with a
a focus group, how to conduct high-quality
professionally written marketing plan and
survey research, how to conduct conjoint
presentation to the client. Should be taken
analysis, and how to use the IAT to develop a
during the student's final semester.
deeper understanding of consumers' implicit
6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
beliefs.
MKT 534: Marketing and Society
This course applies traditional marketing
principles and techniques to the challenges
and rewards of promoting positive public

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MKT 567: Integrated Marketing
Management

172

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Marketing managers must be able to determine
which customers their organization should
serve, which products and services it should
offer them, and how. This course is intended
to develop an analytical framework for these
decisions that permits managers to maximize
their organization's return on marketing
expenditures. Emphasis will be placed on
developing a position in the marketplace
that provides value to customers that is
not readily duplicated by competitors. As
a result, the first half of the course will
develop models for understanding customers,
competitors, and collaborators (e.g., suppliers
and intermediaries). The second half of
the course will examine tools available to
marketers to execute strategic decisions.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring 2021
The learning goals of this course are for the
students to gain an appreciation of examples
of research by physician scientists and its
clinical application. A clinical case will be
presented by faculty or senior students and
this case will be discussed in the light of
a recent biomedical research publication.
The publications are presented, analyzed
and discussed by the students as a group.
Topics are selected from the recent biomedical
literature and can involve any clinical
discipline, basic life science research topics as
well as bioengineering topics.
0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
MST 502: Clinical Scientist Seminar
Series
The learning goals of this course are for the
students to gain an appreciation of examples
of research by physician scientists and its
clinical application. A clinical case will be
presented by faculty or senior students and
this case will be discussed in the light of
a recent biomedical research publication.
The publications are presented, analyzed
and discussed by the students as a group.
Topics are selected from the recent biomedical
literature and can involve any clinical
discipline, basic life science research topics as
well as bioengineering topics.

MKT 569: Digital Marketing
Marketing on the internet is constantly
changing. This course will give you a
theoretical understanding of different digital
marketing activities, current trends and
changes, and the skills to perform vital daily
digital market functions. We will cover Search
Engine Optimization and Search Engine
Marketing (SEO/SEM), Email Marketing,
Social Media Campaigns, Reputation
Management and E-mail marketing. By the
end of the course, students will have earned
two certificates: 1) Digital Marketing from
0-1 credits, S/U grading
Stukent and 2) Google Analytics. Both of these May be repeated for credit.
certificates are well-respected and regarded
in industry and will place students in a good
position for the Digital Marketing job market.

MUS

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MKT 580: Integrated Marketing
Communications
Integrated Marketing Communications is
the practice of developing an overall media
and messaging strategy with a consistent
message to the marketplace. This course
provides students an opportunity to gain
an understanding of how to effectively
communicate with consumers. Topics may
include communication theory, appropriate use
of different media (e.g., television, radio, print,
online), and media planning.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MST
Medical Scientist Training
Program
MST 501: Selected Topics in
Translation/Research and Clinical
Pathological Correlations

Music
MUS 500: Introduction to Music
Research
An introduction into the scholarly study
of Western music. Topics may include:
bibliographic tools for research; historical,
theoretical, and analytical methodologies;
textual scholarship; organology and
iconography; performance practice; aesthetics
and criticism; sociology of music; perception
and cognition; gender and sexuality;
musicology in today's academia and society.
Overview of the history of the field. Emphasis
on recent trends in American musicology.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MUS 501: Compositional Skills of
Tonal Music
An intensive course in chorale harmonization
and counterpoint. (Enrollment limited to 12.)
Permission of instructor required.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

MUS 502: Proseminar in Tonal
Analysis
The application of various techniques of
analysis to tonal works. Rhythmic, harmonic,
linear, thematic, and other elements of
musical structure are considered. Preparation
equivalent to MUS 501 is assumed.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 503: Music in the 20th and 21st
Centuries
An intensive course in contemporary musical
styles, focusing on historical problems.
Seminar reports and research papers on works
of major significance.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MUS 504: Analysis of Music of the 20th
and 21st Centuries
Detailed analyses of various works that are
representative of the significant compositional
systems of recent music.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 505: Foundations of Musicianship
An intensive workshop in the skills of sight
singing and dictation of tonal melodies,
rhythm, and diatonic harmony. Repertoire
is drawn from diverse styles and periods.
Qualified students may be exempted from this
course through a placement exam given at the
beginning of the fall semester.
Fall, 2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MUS 506: Graduate Musicianship
An intensive workshop in the development
of musicianship skills in advanced tonal and
atonal music. The course includes dictation in
a variety of harmonic, melodic, and rhythmic
categories and prepared singing and sightsinging of complex tonal and atonal melodies
(in bass, alto, tenor, and treble clef). Qualified
students may be exempted from this course
through a placement exam given at the
beginning of the fall semester.
Spring, 2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MUS 507: Studies in Music History
Concentrated study of the works of a single
composer, or of repertories that represent
single compositional tendencies in Western
music. Recent topics have included Mozart's
operas, Goethe's Faust and the symphonic
tradition, Bach cantatas, virtuosity, Stravinsky,
music and nationalism, and introduction to
popular music studies.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

173

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 508: Studies in Composition and
Theory
Study of contemporary or traditional
compositional techniques or styles, including
both analysis and exercises in writing. Not
more than eight credits of MUS 507, 508, and
509 combined may be counted toward the
degree.

Spring 2021
Individual short experimental works or
specific assignments. Uses of electronic music
equipment.
Prerequisite: MUS 515 or the equivalent
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MUS 517: Introduction to Computer
Music
A hands-on introduction to the uses of
computers in the creation and performance
of music. Topics include software synthesis,
computer manipulation of natural sound, MIDI
instruments and their use, and interactive
performance. There is a brief survey of the
history, literature and repertoire of the field.

such as composing for string quartet, opera,
orchestra, wind ensemble, Pierrot ensemblein any given semester and is intended as a
practical course for composers. Students will
compose for an ensemble, workshop their
music, and study relevant scores by other
composers. 1-3 credits.
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

MUS 534: Opera Studies
One of the most resilient and popular genres
of spectacle in the West, opera has seen a
remarkable continuity as an institution since
MUS 509: Performance Studies
its birth in 1600. Performed in the opera
house, it has been produced by a fixed set of
Study of an instrument or voice as a
supplement to other work in a graduate music Prerequisite: Music major or permission of the characters: the impresario, the librettist, the
composer, the stage designer, and the director,
program. This course is designed for students
instructor
but also singers, instrumentalists, dancers,
who require piano study in order to pass
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
and the chorus. Operas have traditionally
the piano proficiency requirement, and for
etc.)
absorbed narratives from mythology and
students not in a performance degree program
history but have also been characterized by
who wish to study voice or an instrument.
MUS 518: Advanced Projects in
freely-invented plots. Operas have often
Computer
Music
Prerequisite: Audition
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, Advanced projects, individual or collaborative, generated political, philosophical, and artistic
debates, and provide today's scholars with a
in computer music.
A-, B+, etc.)
unique window into historical, ideological,
May be repeated for credit.
Prerequisite: MUS 517 and permission of
sociological, and aesthetic issues. The hybrid
instructor
genre par excellence, opera continues to be
MUS 513: Workshop in Instrumentation
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
a catalyst for creativity in various arts, and
and Orchestration
A-, B+, etc.)
in present-day production often features the
Studies in writing for specific instruments
May be repeated for credit.
most advanced media and technologies. This
and ensembles through practical exercises
seminar will capitalize on both the continuity
and examination of the repertory. Faculty and MUS 519: Composer's Forum
and the diversity of the genre, bringing
student performers discuss the capabilities
Practicum for student composers to learn how together graduate students in music history,
of their instruments and perform and discuss
to present their music in a professional context. theory, and performance.
exercises written for the class.
1-2 credits, S/U grading
Offered
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, May be repeated for credit.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
B+, etc.)
etc.)
MUS 520: Introduction to Music
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 514: Audio Engineering
Research for DMA Students
Technical fundamentals of audio engineering
An introduction to music research and
MUS 535: Lecture-Workshop in the
for the serious practitioner, with primary
bibliography for DMA and MA students in
Performance of Baroque Music
emphasis on sound reinforcement and
their first year of study. Introduces students to An examination of problems confronting
recording arts. The course focuses on
music research databases and searching, proper the performer of music from the period
measurement and critical listening, and
bibliographic practices, score editions and
ca. 1600-1750, from both musicological
investigates the basic operational theory of
other information relevant to doctoral research. and practical points of view. The basso
principal devices and systems.
Administered as an asynchronous tutorial with continuo, its function and realization; phrasing
synchronous components added as needed.
Prerequisite: permission of instructor
and articulation; ornaments, notated and
May be waived by proof of comparable course improvised; period instruments; aspects of
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
in earlier study.
etc.)
notation; bibliography. The course meets in
S/U grading
lecture for two hours each week with a third
MUS 515: The Fundamentals of
hour devoted to the coaching of a rehearsal or
Electronic Music
MUS 523: Advanced Composition
performance of music prepared by members of
A short survey of the history and literature
Individual projects for graduate students in
the class.
of the medium is followed by study of the
composition.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
pertinent background in theoretical acoustics
Fall and Spring, 2-6 credits, Letter graded (A, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
and practical engineering. Students are
A-, B+, etc.)
instructed in the basic techniques of electronic
MUS 536: Area Studies in
May be repeated for credit.
sound production and modification.
Ethnomusicology
Fall or Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MUS 516: Electronic Music Workshop

MUS 524: Topics in Music Composition Examination of the music of a selected
Topics in Music Composition treats specific
world area, combining musical analysis with
genres and techniques of music compositiona consideration of historical, social, and

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

174

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
performance contexts. Recent topics have
included Brazilian music from 1822 to the
present; music, politics, and society in Eastern
Europe; and a century of Middle Eastern
musics. May be repeated for credit.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 537: Research Methods in
Ethnomusicology
A practicum covering both the theoretical
foundations and practical components
of ethnomusicological field research and
analysis. Emphasis is on designing and
undertaking a small musical ethnography, and
on exploring practical, ethical, ontological and
epistemological aspects of ethnomusicological
research. Weekly readings and a final project.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MUS 538: Phenomenological
Approaches to Music Analysis
Concepts from phenomenological philosophy
are used as a basis for the study of music from
various periods and cultures, with an emphasis
on recent music in the Western classical
tradition. Readings include Heidegger,
Husserl, and later writings in phenomenology;
philosophies of space and time; and music
theoretic studies by Clifton, J. Kramer, Lewin,
and others.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MUS 539: Proseminar in
Ethnomusicology
An introduction to the field of
ethnomusicology as practiced in Europe
and North America over the past century.
Theoretical and methodological approaches in
ethnomusicology are examined as they relate
to major periods in the history of ethnographic
disciplines.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MUS 540: Studies in Cultural
Historiography
This course is intended to promote the
student's knowledge and reflection about the
study of the history of the arts as history.
It is organized on the following topics:
origins and philosophical foundations
of the modern historical consciousness;
the nature of historical knowledge and
explanation; historiographic models; and
origins, philosophical foundations, and genres
of historical musicology.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring 2021
MUS 541: Topics in the Cross-Cultural
Study of Music
Examination of a topic of current interest in
the cross-cultural study of music. Readings
from various intellectual traditions in the
humanities and social sciences provide a
context within which to appraise recent
research in ethnomusicology, historical
musicology, and popular music studies, and
to formulate possible directions for future
research. Representative topics include music
and gender, music and the media, music and
power, and performance and performers.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 542: Ethnomusicology and Social
Theory
An introduction to major schools of social
theory as they may be applied to the
analysis of music and related performance
forms. Theoretical writings in sociology,
anthropology, philosophy, cultural studies and
related fields will be paired with case studies
that situate musical creation, performance and
dissemination within the unfolding of societal
processes.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MUS 543: Topics in Medieval Music
Study of a focused area in medieval music,
such as the works of Guillaume de Machaut,
transmission processes, and the Notre Dame
repertory.

MUS 549: Topics in 18th-Century
Music
Investigation of critical, analytical, and
historical issues in 18th-century music, such as
the interpretation of sketches and fragments,
counterpoint teaching in the 1790s, and the
music of Mozart.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 553: Topics in 19th-Century
Music
Historical, analytical, and critical issues in the
music of the 19th century. Recent topics have
included Italian opera, the unfinished works of
Schubert, and genre in Chopin's oeuvre.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 555: Topics in 20th-Century
Music
Focused study of selected issues in music
of the 20th century. Recent topics have
included primitivism and exoticism; quotation,
borrowing, and collage; the music of Roger
Sessions; and the Second Viennese school.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

MUS 557: Topics in Theory
Studies in the writings of music theorists from
the Middle Ages through the present day in the
context of contemporary repertoires. Recent
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, topics have included modal theory as a model
B+, etc.)
for melodic construction; efforts to adapt
May be repeated for credit.
modal theory to polyphonic practice; rhythm in
theory and practice; theories of tonality from
MUS 545: Topics in Renaissance Music Rameau to Schenker; theoretical approaches to
Historical, analytical, and critical issues related post-tonal and 12-tone music; and theories of
to Renaissance music. Recent topics have
timbre and texture.
included early 15th-century song repertories,
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
the boundaries of the Renaissance, and the
B+, etc.)
works of Ockeghem. May be repeated if topic May be repeated for credit.
is sufficiently different.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, MUS 559: Topics in Analysis
B+, etc.)
Intensive analytical study of selected works
May be repeated for credit.
and exploration of analytical problems. Recent
topics have included analysis and performance,
MUS 547: Topics in Baroque Music
melody, Xenakis and Ligeti, Beethoven's late
Historical problems in music of the Baroque
quartets, Berg's Lulu, and the string quartet
era. Recent topics have included German
since 1945.
Passion settings, theories of expression and
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
representation, and musical rhetoric.
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

May be repeated for credit.
MUS 562: Dalcroze Method: Music
Pedagogy for Children

175

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
A focus on the unique approach of Emile
Jacques-Dalcroze, which takes into
consideration his approach in light of recent
developments in early childhood music
education. The idea that students experience
music physically before they wrestle with
symbols and theoretical abstraction is at the
heart of Dalcroze work. The Dalcroze music
pedagogy includes: Eurhythmics-developing
a sense of rhythm and musical expression
through whole-body movement; Solfégedeveloping a sense of harmony and rhythm
through singing games; and Improvisation.
This class is designed primarily for music
teachers, elementary school classroom teachers
and professional musicians. Participants are
expected to be able to read and notate simple
rhythms and melodies. (formerly: Musical
Learning, the Body, and Eurhythmics)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MUS 563: Advanced Choral
Conducting A
Advanced training in preparing and conducting
choral works. Students spend a semester
in score study, receive individual private
instruction, and are expected to participate in
the rehearsing of the University Chorus, the
University Chorale, and the Chamber Singers.
Open only to students enrolled in graduate
conducting programs.
Fall and Spring, 3-6 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
MUS 564: Advanced Choral
Conducting B
Advanced training in preparing and conducting
choral works. Not open to students enrolled in
the graduate conducting programs.
Prerequisite: Instructor consent
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
MUS 565: Stony Brook Symphony
Orchestra
Study and performance of orchestral works
from the Baroque period to the present.
Fall and Spring, 1-2 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 566: Camerata Singers
Study and performance of choral works for
chamber chorus from all periods of music
history.
May be repeated.
Fall and Spring, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Spring 2021
MUS 567: Master Class in Orchestral
Repertory
Study of orchestral parts for sections (brass,
strings, woodwinds) or for individual
instruments. The course emphasizes overall
ensemble skills and audition preparation.
Different sections directed toward specific
groups. See the course listing for offerings in
any particular semester.

MUS 572: Improvisation
Practical study of the skills and sources of
musical improvisation, including playfulness,
emotion, courage, concentration, risk,
instrumental and vocal technique, patience
and trust. Improvisational skills will not
be limited to any single musical style. All
students will be required to improvise vocally
or instrumentally.

Fall and Spring, 1-2 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Fall, 1-2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

MUS 568: Jazz Big Band
Study and performance of works for jazz
ensemble from the early 20th century to the
present.

MUS 573: Chamber Music
Chamber ensembles such as the string quartet,
wind quintet, solo vocal ensemble, twopiano team, and other special groups meet,
each under the direction of a member of the
performance faculty, for the study of works
from the repertories of the respective groups,
with particular attention given to the music of
the 20th and 21st centuries.

Fall, 1-2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 569: Perspectives on the
Performance of Music Since 1945
The course focuses on issues of performance
of music written after 1945 from technical,
conceptual and aesthetic perspectives.
Weekly assignments will be focused
around topics such as: notation; extended
techniques; rhythmic practices; performing
with electronics; structure and analysis; the
theatricality of performance; music and the
political; interpretation and style, including
cross-cultural and cross-gentre works; and
indeterminacy/choice/improvisation.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
MUS 570: Introduction to the History
and Performance of the String Bass in
Jazz
Study of the historical development of the
string bass in jazz and other related improvised
musics through a selection of reading and
listening projects. Practical assignments
will include making transcriptions of classic
records and then learning to play them on
bass, employing the time-proven method of
"copying the masters."
1-2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MUS 571: Advanced Instruction in
Instrument or Voice
Individual guidance in technique and
repertory, with 30 practice hours required each
week. Each student is required to perform
at least one solo piece per semester, unless
excused by the instructor in a written note to
the department's graduate program committee.
Fall and Spring, 1-6 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Required: Presence at coaching sessions,
at least three hours per week of uncoached
rehearsal, and at least one performance per
semester
Fall and Spring, 1-2 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 575: Master Class in Solo
Repertory for Instrument or Voice
Performance techniques and problems in
works for instrument or voice, drawn from all
historical periods. The instructor is a teacher
of the specific instrument in each case, except
that his or her section may be open to students
of certain other instruments with his or her
permission. Not offered each semester in every
instrument.
Fall and Spring, 1-2 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 576: Instrumental Repertoire
before 1750
Exploration of instrumental repertoire in the
17th and 18th centuries.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 2 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MUS 577: Master Class in Performance
Pedagogy
Guidance and supervision in the teaching of an
instrument or voice.
2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MUS 579: Opera Workshop
Study and performance of scenes and complete
operas from the standard and 20th-century
repertories. An interdisciplinary approach
176

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
involving the departments of Music and
Theatre Arts.
Fall and Spring, 1-2 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 580: Vocal Diction
A thorough study of the rules of pronunciation
and International Phonetic Alphabet
transcription in a major language of the voice
repertory: Italian, French, or German. Special
attention to lyric projection of the language
as it relates to voice production, listener
comprehension, and musical values. Course
work includes coaching in appropriate song
and operatic literature. The specific language
studied rotates from semester to semester.

Spring 2021
MUS 585: Early Music Performance
Practice
Study and implementation of Renaissance
and Baroque performance practices. Areas
include brass ensemble music and lute and
guitar repertories.
Fall and Spring, 2 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 586: Collaborative Keyboard
Performance
Study and performance of the keyboard parts
of instrumental and vocal recital repertoire.
1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Fall and Spring, 1-2 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

MUS 587: Collaborative Keyboard
Study and performance of the keyboard parts
of instrumental and vocal recital repertoire.

MUS 581: Harpsichord for Pianists
(Beginning)
Fundamentals of harpsichord techniques,
touch, and repertoire for students already
possessing a keyboard background.

1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Fall, alternate years, 2 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
MUS 582: Harpsichord for Pianists
(Advanced)
Continuation of MUS 581: Further exploration
of techniques and repertoire.
Prerequisite: Piano major or strong keyboard
background.
Spring, alternate years, 2 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MUS 583: Continuo Realization
Practical and theoretical instruction in figured
bass realization, based on the study of vocal
and instrumental scores from 1600-1750.
Required of students in harpsichord. Open,
with consent of the instructor, to other
qualified students who have some knowledge
of figured bass realization.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 2 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
MUS 584: Baroque Chamber Ensemble
Study and performance of instrumental and
vocal music, 1600-1750. Participants work
from scholarly editions and original sources
whenever possible and have the possibility of
performing on replicas of early instruments.
A concert is given at the end of the class term.
Acceptance by audition.
Fall and Spring, 1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

MUS 590: Masters Practicum in
Professional Skills
Practical training in activities related to the
professional work of a performing musician,
including teaching, solo and ensemble
performance, conducting, internships and
related musical work, both on and off-campus.
Required of all full-time students in the
M.M. performance program. All off-campus
activities in fulfillment of this course must be
approved by the Graduate Program Director,
who acts as supervisor for this course. Fall
and Spring only, 1 credit, S/U grading May be
repeated for credit.
1 credit, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 591: Practicum in Teaching
Instruction in the department under the
supervision of the faculty. (MUS 591 may not
be included in the courses taken in fulfillment
of degree requirements.)
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 592: Seminar on the Teaching of
Music
Discussion of fundamental problems
in teaching music. Topics may include
the explanation of musical processes;
communication to nonprofessionals; and
integration of aspects of performance, theory,
history, and analysis with one another.
Required of all students who teach one of
the introductory undergraduate courses in
musicianship, theory, or literature; to be taken
during the first semester of teaching.

May be repeated for credit.
MUS 593: Practicum in Performance
Individual instruction and/or coaching for
professional performing experience.
Fall and Spring, 0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 594: Masters Intersession
Practicum
Practical training in activities related to the
professional work of a performing musician,
including teaching, solo and ensemble
performance, conducting, internships and
related musical work, both on and off-campus.
All off-campus activities in fulfillment of this
course must be approved by the Graduate
Program Director, who acts as supervisor for
this course. This course is only to be used
for Winter and Summer sessions. Winter and
Summer only, S/U grading May be repeated.
S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 596: Contemporary Chamber
Players
The study and performance of music of
the 20th and 21st centuries for ensemble,
ranging from duos to larger conducted groups.
Repertoire includes 20th-century classics as
well as new works, including compositions
written by Stony Brook students. A full
schedule of public performances takes place.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructors
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 597: Jazz Chamber Ensemble
Study and performance of works for jazz
ensemble. Prerequisites: Permission: Audition
required. Fall and Spring
0-1 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 599: Independent Studies
Individual studies under the guidance of a
faculty member. Each student must submit
to the graduate studies committee of the
department a written prospectus of the work
he or she intends to pursue, with the amount
of credit proposed, together with the written
endorsement of the prospective instructor.
Approval of the graduate studies committee
is required; hence this material should be
submitted as soon as possible, and in any case
within the first two weeks of the semester (or
the first week of a summer session).
0-16 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Fall, 1 credit, S/U grading
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

177

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
MUS 615: Seminar in Electronic Music
Composition
Individual compositions of substantial
proportions in electronic or concrete music
media. The course may be repeated. Open
only to qualified students in a music degree
program.
Prerequisite: MUS 516 or the equivalent
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 623: Directed Study in
Composition
Intended for doctoral students in composition.
Fall and Spring, 1-12 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 661: Directed Study in
Conducting
Intended for doctoral students in conducting.
Fall and Spring, 1-12 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 671: Directed Study in
Instrumental and Vocal Performance
Intended for doctoral students in instrumental
and vocal performance.
Fall and Spring, 1-12 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 690: Doctoral Practicum in
Professional Skills
Practical training in activities related to the
professional work of a performing musician,
including teaching, solo and ensemble
performance, conducting, internships and
related musical work, both on and off-campus.
Required of all full-time students in the
D.M.A. performance program, except for
students taking MUS 701. All off-campus
activities in fulfillment of this course must be
approved by the Graduate Program Director,
who acts as supervisor for this course.

Spring 2021
for Winter and Summer sessions. Winter and
Summer only, S/U grading May be repeated.

Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

MUS 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
MUS 695: Doctoral Essay Tutorial
(G5). Major portion of research will take
Development of an essay to fulfill
requirements in either DMA or PhD programs. place outside of the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
Students may enroll in this course only after
option of the health plan and may also enroll
completing the required graduate seminars or
proseminars (see program requirements) with a in MEDEX. International students who are
grade of "B" or better in both the seminar and in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
the essay to be developed.
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
Prerequisite: MUS 502, 503, 504, 507, 535,
be removed. International students who are
537-555, 557, or 559
not in their home country are charged for the
Fall and Spring, 1-2 credits, Letter graded (A,
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
A-, B+, etc.)
covered by another insurance plan they must
May be repeated for credit.
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
MUS 696: Doctoral Colloquium or
deemed comparable.
Lecture-Recital
Students are required to enroll in MUS 696 in
the semester in which the Ph.D. colloquium
or the D.M.A. lecture-recital is given. The
instructor, chosen in consultation with the
directing committee, acts as an advisor or
tutor, and signals to the graduate program
committee that the colloquium or lecturerecital may be given.
Fall and Spring, 1 credit, S/U grading
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
MUS 697: Directed Reading
Intended for preparation for the preliminary
examinations and related requirements.
Fall and Spring, 1-12 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Intended for work in the area of the
dissertation.

1 credit, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

Prerequisite: Advancement to candidacy (G5).
Major portion of research must take place on
SBU campus, at Cold Spring Harbor, or at the
Brookhaven National Lab.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.

MUS 694: Doctoral Intersession
Practicum
Practical training in activities related to the
professional work of a performing musician,
including teaching, solo and ensemble
performance, conducting, internships and
related musical work, both on and off-campus.
All off-campus activities in fulfillment of this
course must be approved by the Graduate
Program Director, who acts as supervisor for
this course. This course is only to be used

MUS 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

All international students must received
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 800: Summer Research
Students who receive support for summer
research must register for this course, which
gives them full-time status.
S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
MUS 850: Summer Teaching
Students who receive support for summer
teaching must register for this course, which
gives them full-time status.
S/U grading

NET
Independent Project
NET 508: OBJ.ORIENTED SYS DEV
NET 509: ADVANCED VLSI DESIGN
NET 510: ADV.PROD:SCHED.CNTRL
NET 512: INTRO TO ELOPTICS
NET 513: PRIN ENGR MGT II
NET 514: SEM DEVICE PROCESIN
NET 515: SEMICONDUC DEVCE PRO
NET 516: Man Machine Systems

178

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

The course introduces students to basic
principles of molecular neuroscience. Topics
covered include the signal transduction,
Neuroscience
regulation of neural gene expression and
human neural genetic diseases. Semesters
NEU 501: Introduction to Neuroscience Offered: Fall
Research
2-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
A series of talks, discussions, and practical
exercises to address topics related to research
NEU 531: Sensory and Motor Systems
in neurobiology including laboratory etiquette, This course introduces students to current
the laboratory notebook, experimental
debates on sensory and motor systems. Topics
design and basic experimental techniques
and areas covered include: general principles
used in neuroscience research including
of sensory and motor coding, sensory systems
electrophysiology, behavioral testing,
(somatosensation, audition, vision, taste and
molecular and cellular techniques, imaging
olfaction), voluntary control of movement,
and computational approaches. Prerequisites:
modulation of movement by cerebellum and
Matriculation in MS program or permission of basal ganglia.
instructor Summer 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
A-, B+, etc.)

NEU

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

NEU 532: Neural Plasticity Learning
and Memory
NEU 502: Reading, Writing, and
This course introduces students to the link
Speaking Neurobiology
between plasticity, learning and memory.
Seminar course for master's students in
Topics covered include: synaptic plasticity,
Neuroscience that will provide the student with synaptic homeotasis, brain connectivity,
practical instruction in analyzing the literature, neurogenesis, aversive and reward learning,
written and oral presentation skills. Course
addiction.
exercises will focus on the student's thesis
2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
research.
2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
NEU 517: Principles of Cell Signaling
Nervous system function is dependant on the
ability of signals to flow between and within
cells. The basic principles of cellular signaling
and maintenance of cellular and organismic
homeostasis through intra and intercellular
signaling mechanisms will be covered.
Emphasis will be placed on relationships
between nuclear events and ongoing processes
of the cell. The roles of membrane receptors
and second-messenger pathways in mediating
such diverse events as bacterial chemotaxis,
protozoan locomotion, and secretion are
discussed. Semesters Offered: Summer
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
NEU 521: Introduction to Cellular
Neuroscience
The course introduces students to basic
principles of cellular neuroscience. Topics
covered include the ionic basis of resting
potentials and electrical excitability, the
structure, function and molecular biology
of voltage-and ligand-gated ion channels.
Semesters Offered: Fall
2-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
NEU 522: Introduction to Molecular
Neuroscience

NEU 534: Principles of Neurobiology
Neuroscience investigates how the brain
functions. This course begins with a review
of cellular and molecular mechanisms of
brain function, considers brain systems for
motor control and sensory processing, and
then finishes with a description of the cellular
and molecular underpinnings of higher brain
functions such as learning, emotion, and
cognition. Semester Offered: Summer
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
NEU 536: Introduction to
Computational Neuroscience
This course will introduce students to
the fundamental principles and methods
underlying computational modeling of
neurobiological systems, spanning a range
of topics from the biophysics of excitable
membranes to models of learning and
memory. A major focus of the course will
be on the process by which a model of a
neurobiological system is developed. Students
will be introduced to the mathematical
methods required for the modeling of such
systems, as well as to tools for numerical and
computational simulation. The students will
also learn programming skills in the Matlab
computing environment and will be required
to perform Matlab projects to complement the
material learned in the lectures.
2-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

NEU 537: Nuerotransmission and
Neuromodulation
Exploration of fundamental concepts of
neurotransmission and neuromodulation of
synaptic transmission. The subject matter
includes an overview of the basic principles of
neurotransmission and of the neuromodulatory
systems in the brain. The involvement of these
systems in behavior and neurological disorders
is emphasized. We will discuss how specific
neurological disorders can be investigated
experimentally and how experimental results
can contribute to understanding and treating
these disorders.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
NEU 547: Introduction to Neural
Computation
A broad introduction to neural computation.
This course will discuss what counts as
¿computation¿ and in what sense the brain
computes, how it computes, and whether
those computations look anything like
those performed by digital computers.
These ideas and concepts will be introduced
through examples of computation in the
brain, including the neural bases of sensory
perception, decision making, learning and
memory, and motor control. Students will
learn through in-class demonstrations and
activities, as well as homework assignments
that give students the opportunity to analyze
real neural recordings relevant to each of the
topic modules. Students taking this class will
be expected to have basic working knowledge
in undergraduate-level calculus and statistics.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
NEU 548: MS Research Practicum in
Neuroscience
The student will be introduced to modern
neuroscience research techniques through
participation in ongoing research in the
laboratory of a Program in Neuroscience
Faculty member for one semester. Student
must obtain permission to register from the
sponsoring faculty member. Prerequisite:
Matriculation in MS program or permission of
instructor Semesters Offered:
Fall, Spring, Summer, 0-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
NEU 549: MS Thesis Research
The student will conduct Neuroscience
research in the laboratory of a program in
Neuroscience Faculty. Student must obtain
permission to register from the sponsoring
faculty member. Prerequisite: Matriculation in
MS program or permission of instructor.
0-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
179

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

data management while enforcing skills
for data analysis and presentation of study
NUR 647: Doctoral Research Seminar
results. This course includes issues related
Nursing
to data management and data collection
This course will provide the student with
for a clinical research project to meet the
the academic skills necessary to build the
NUR 630: Philosophical Foundations
scientific foundation for the advanced practice needs of this group of trainees. Trainees will
of Nursing Science
be evaluated by participation in the class
of nursing. Theory and evidence-driven
This course explores historical and
exercises, homework assignments, quizzes, onprojects will be developed in collaboration
current views of knowledge development
line course discussions through Blackboard,
with interdisciplinary mentors. Peer review
underpinning philosophies of science, social
development of an individual simulated
skills will be refined.
science, and nursing science. Underlying
project, and an individual oral presentation
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
ontological and epistemological assumptions
of the student¿s simulated project describing
of philosophical views and how they influence NUR 660: Quantitative Designs and
their choices for data management methods
scientific inquiry in nursing will be addressed. Methods in Nursing Research
and results to be presented during the last two
A key component of these discussions will
classes. The individual project will include
This course explores the major designs and
be the implications of diverse perspectives on
methods used for the investigation of problems development of a questionnaire, codebook,
theoretical thinking, scientific inquiry, and
database and creation of a test data set for
requiring quantitative approaches. Types of
knowledge development in nursing.
research designs are analyzed including major use in conducting analyses and the final
presentation.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
strengths and limitations of each. Population
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
sampling, participant selection, and data
NUR 631: Concepts, Theories and
collection and analysis methods are compared
Knowledge Development in Nursing
NUR 670: Independent Studies
and contrasted.
Science
This student-initiated elective course provides
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
This course will provide doctoral students
an opportunity to use enhance the depth
with a systematic overview of concepts
of a student's chose area of research. The
NUR 661: Qualitative Methods in
and theories as a foundation for knowledge
independent student can be in specific
Nursing Research
development in nursing. Conceptual and
content areas or methodological or analytical
This course explores the major approaches to
analytical skills are developed through analysis
qualitative inquiry. Philosophical or theoretical approaches. Independent Studies cannot
and critique of nursing concepts, clinical
replace courses for a degree.
underpinnings specific to each approach
phenomena and science-based theories. The
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
are analyzed. Selected frameworks for data
course examines the theoretical and empirical
collection and analysis are presented. Selection May be repeated 4 times FOR credit.
foundation of nursing, approaches to the
of participants, data collection and analysis of
analysis and development of nursing concepts,
NUR 680: Integrating Big Data to
each tradition are compared and contrasted.
the role of concepts in nursing science, and
The elements of rigor in qualitative inquiry are Evaluate Population Health
the applicability of nursing concepts and
This course will focus on available sources
explored.
theories to clinical practice. Focus will be on
of population data, how to access them, and
3
credits,
Letter
graded
(A,
A-,
B+,
etc.)
development and use of conceptual language,
begin to explore geographic regions through
critical thinking skills, and in analyzing
data. Students will be introduced to the field
NUR 662: Data Management and
literature portraying key nursing concepts.
of Biomedical Informatics. Innovative tools
Informatics for Clinical Scientists
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
developed at Stony Brook by informaticians to
The aims of this course will be achieved by
evaluate population health will be presented.
participation in a 45-hour (3 credit) course
NUR 635: Biostatistics
Students will learn how to use data to identify
consisting of lectures, hands-on computer
This course will provide the student with
populations at risk ¿ who they are, where they
application training/labs, hands-on exercises/
knowledge of statistical approaches utilized
live and to identify key focus areas to target
assignments, discussions and quizzes, and
in epidemiological studies. Analysis of risk
intervention. With this knowledge students
an individual final presentation. The course
factors and disease data will be emphasized.
will be able to outline programs that may
will provide training in questionnaire design,
Applying epidemiologic methods to critically
reduce health disparities, as well as evaluate
the use for REDCap for data input and
evaluate the evidence used in clinical decision
other health risks in regional populations.
managements, Excel for budget management,
making will be an important aspect of this
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SPSS for data processing and analysis, and
course.
Power Point for print/slide presentations and
NUR 690: Dissertation Seminar I
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
report generation. Trainees will be instructed
This course focuses on the development of
in the conduct for good clinical practice as it
NUR 636: Advanced Statistical
relates to data collection and data management. the doctoral dissertation proposal. Students
Methods
will apply their theoretical knowledge and
Trainees will be introduced to available
This course will build on the foundations of
research proficiency to transform their general
comprehensive systems for collaborations,
NUR 635 and extend the doctoral student¿s
ideas about their dissertation topic into a
data management and data capture (e.g.,
exposure to more complex inferential statistics REDCap, on Core) and issues of data security research strategy. Students will prepare key
used in healthcare research. Statistical
elements of the dissertation proposal, including
as it relates to clinical research. The hands-on
applications will be explored in the context of exercises/assignments, discussions, quizzes,
Statement of the Problem, Research Questions
nursing research. Practical application of these and homework assignments will help to
and/or Hypotheses Conceptual/Theoretical
statistical methods will be conducted using
develop skills in questionnaire design, methods Framework, Literature Review, and Research
SPSS statistical software.
Methods. Using a seminar format, teachingof data study collection, data capture, and

NUR

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

180

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
learning strategies are designed to promote
critical/analytical thinking and scholarly
discourse.
0-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
NUR 691: Dissertation Seminar II
This course focuses on the conduct of the
doctoral dissertation under the guidance of the
student's dissertation committee. Students will
secure applicable human subjects protection,
carry out their research methodologies,
and complete analyses of data. The course
culminates in a scholarly paper (Dissertation)
that exemplifies the student's expertise
and their new and creative contribution to
nursing. Using a seminar format, teachinglearning strategies are designed to promote
critical/analytical thinking and scholarly
discourse. Students are required to provide
regular updates of the study's progress to the
dissertation committee chairperson.
0-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
NUR 697: Research Practicum
The course introduces graduate students to
significant and methodologically rigorous
research. School of Nursing faculty and
affiliated faculty from Stony Brook Medicine
and Stony Brook University will serve as
preceptors as students engage in a supervised,
hands-on practicum with ongoing research.
Students will develop contracts that identify
individualized learning outcomes of the
practicum that will be facilitated by direct
advisement and mentorship of School of
Nursing and affiliated faculty. Opportunities
during the practicum will include subject
recruitment and screening, data collection
and analyses, interpretation of results,
research report writing an preparation of
products for scholarly dissemination. While
the research practicum may not necessarily
expose students to the specific population or
problem of greatest interest to them, the skills
or competencies mastered can prepare students
methodologically to carry out their dissertation
research strategy.
3 credits, S/U grading
NUR 698: Teaching Practicum
The course introduces graduate students to
the major pedagogical theories and practices
in academia. Students will develop contracts
that identify individualized learning outcomes
of the practicum that will be facilitated
by direct advisement and mentorship of
School of Nursing faculty. The practicum
will include the student teaching part of a
course, developing learning modules and
student assignments, evaluating student

Spring 2021
performance, and evaluating their own
teaching performance.
3 credits, S/U grading
NUR 699: PhD Dissertation Research On Campus
NUR 700: PhD Dissertation ResearchOff Campus
May be repeated for credit.
NUR 701: PhD Dissertation ResearchOff Campus (International)
May be repeated for credit.

OAE
Oral Academic English
OAE 590: Oral Academic English
(Intermediate)
The purpose of this course is to do intensive
work in aural and oral language skills.
Emphasis is on the segmental level: vowel/
consonant work, syllable work and word
stress as well as rhythm on the sentence
level. Summarizing and questioning are
practiced with work on learning styles.
Students' awareness of American teaching
and cultural patterns are stressed. Observing
American professors and students in class is
encouraged. A student will receive a diagnostic
assessment of her/his language segmental and
suprasegmental difficulties from the instructor
and will be expected to work on improvement
in these speech areas both in the classroom and
independently in the language laboratories.
Successful completion (A- or higher) of the
course leads to OAE 594; B+ or below leads to
OAE 592. Prerequisite: IELTS score of 5-5.5
or iBT Speak score of 15-17
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
OAE 592: Oral Academic English (High
Intermediate)
The emphasis of this course is threefold:
developing language skills, teaching skills
and cultural awareness. Language skills will
focus on sentence stress, phrasing, linking
and pausing with field specific language
practice. Teaching skills stressed include
questioning techniques for discussion and
assessment, leading effective discussions
and assessing student learning. The cultural
awareness focuses on idioms, American
cultural values and norms as well as nonverbal communication. Successful completion
of this course (B or higher) leads to OAE 594.
Prerequisites: IELTS score of 6.0 or iBT Speak
score of 18-20.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
OAE 594: Oral Academic English
(Advanced)
This course further develops language skills
at the supra segmental level, teaching skills,
cultural awareness and presentation skills.
Intonation is taught with self-monitoring
strategies. The teaching skills examine
strategies for introducing yourself, your
syllabus, explaining a visual, defining terms,
giving presentations and giving successful
lectures. Analysis of presentations is given to
each student throughout the semester. Cultural
awareness is centered on some assumptions
affecting teaching in the American classroom.
Success completion of this course (a B or
better) clears the student from the oral/aural
ESL requirements. Prerequisites: IELTS score
of 6.5 or iBT Speak score of 21-22)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

PHC
Philosophy
PHI 500: Feminist Theories
This course is designed to introduce students
to the most recent developments in feminist
theory, covering different currents as well
as traditions. The seminar may focus on
moral and political questions, the intersection
between the social and the psychological, or
culture and representation as it is negotiated
in different cultural media (film, literature,
architecture, music, etc.)
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 501: Theories of Race
This course is designed to introduce the
student to different currents of analyses of
race and racism. It focuses particularly on
the relationship between philosophy and the
development, legitimacy and legimation of
racial categories. The seminar may focus on
moral and political philosophy, questions of
epistemology or metaphysics, the intersections
between the social and the psychological, or
culture and representations of raced subjects as
they are negotiated in different cultural media
(film, literature, architecture, music, etc.)
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 503: Theories of Ethnicity
This course focuses on the category of
ethnicity. Using an inter-cultural, comparative
and historical approach, it seeks to expose
the student to the uses and misuses of this
181

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
category. The category of ethnicity will also be
studied in conjunctions with questions relating
to individual identity, national, cultural and
civilizational identities. Ethnicity, like Race
and Gender, is one of the most fundamental
markers of identity. Using interdisciplinary
and comparative methods and perspectives,
ethnicity's role in the constitutions of identities
will be studied.

Spring 2021
This course deals with the theoretical
approaches to the study of art that cross
historical boundaries. Topics vary from
semester to semester. They may be an
expansion of one of the areas generally
covered in ARH 540, such as psychology of
art or the iconography of architecture. Other
investigations may focus on subjects requiring
a special methodological approach, such as the
theory and history of ornament and design or
the role of public art.

year of master's degree work at Stony Brook
Manhattan.
Fall, Spring, every year, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

PHI 510: Ancient Philosophy
An in-depth reading of few fundamental texts
of classical antiquity that conceptualize mind/
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
soul as object of rational investigation. These
May be repeated for credit.
ancient theories contain within themselves all
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, the principal elements of later philosophies
PHI 504: Intersections of Race,
B+, etc.)
of mind. This course aims at making these
Ethinicity, and Gender
May be repeated for credit.
elements explicit through the study of the
This course, which is analogous to an honors
following: Anaxagoras, selected fragments
PHI 507: Aesthetic System
senior seminar, seeks to integrate into a
on "mind"; Plato, Republic (selection) and
productive dialogue the different methods,
A concentrated reading of a single major work, Phaedo; Aristotle, De Anima (Peri Psyche);
traditions and perspectives used to analyze
with attention both to its detailed structure
Marcus Aurelius, The Meditations; Lucretius,
Race, Ethnicity, and Gender, while also
and to its larger significance. Candidates for
On the Nature of Things. 3 credits, ABCF
juxtaposing and comparing the similarities and such reading include Aristotle's Poetics, Kant's grading, offered Fall/Spring alternate years
differences between them. The approach, as in Critique of Judgement, Hegel's Lectures on
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
the whole program, will be inderdisciplinary
The Philiosophy of Art, Adorno's Aesthetic
and comparative.
Theory, Collingwood's Principles of Art,
PHI 511: Modern Philosophy
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) Langer's Feeling and Form, Dewey's Art as
This is an advanced course that investigates
Experience, Heidegger's "The Origin of the
May be repeated for credit.
pivotal connections between seventeenth and
Work of Art", and Danto's Transfiguration of
eighteenth-century theories of knowledge,
the Commonplace.
PHI 505: Core Course in Philosophy
metaphysics, aesthetics, and ethics. It surveys
and the Arts: History of Aesthetic
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) key developments in these areas of philosophic
Theory
May be repeated for credit.
inquiry during the sixteenth and seventeenth
The basic course will investigate some of the
centuries. It also involves careful explicative
PHI 508: Contemporary Issues in the
most important and influential theories of art
work on texts written by major thinkers of
in the West from Plato to the present. Readings Arts
the period, e.g., Descartes, Locke, Leibniz,
and discussion in depth of major figures
With an eye on artworks accessible in
Spinoza, Malebranch, Shaftesbury, Hutcheson,
will make up the content of the course: e.g.,
the public sphere - museums, galleries,
Hume, Rousseau, and Kant.
Plato, Aristotle, Kant, Hegel, Schopenhauer,
concerts, readings, dance performances, film
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Nietzsche, Heidegger, Collingwood, Langer,
- philosophical questions will be raised: Why
Merleau-Ponty, Dufrenne. The focus
these works now? How do they compare with PHI 520: Advanced Studies in
throughout will be on central issues in
their predecessors? What do they portend
Philosophy
aesthetics such as imitation, truth, beauty,
for the future of art? Visits to the sites and
Investigations into specialty areas led and
expression, emotion, and imagination.
performances of such works will be integrated directed by accomplished philosophers in
into an ongoing discussion of the issues they
Fall, Spring, every year, 3 credits, Letter
the discipline involved. Instructor consent
raise within the context of aesthetic theory
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
required. No more than six credits of PHI 520
- and what new theories they suggest. This
May be repeated for credit.
may count towards the fulfillment of degree
course will be co-scheduled with ITL571,
requirements in the MA program.
FRN571, and EGL603
PHI 506: Art and Its Problems
Offered:
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
A consideration of basic problems in the
Fall, Spring, Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded
May be repeated for credit.
creation and appreciation of art. What is the
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
creative process? Who is the artist? How is
May be repeated for credit.
art to be compared with other symbolic forms PHI 509: Special Seminar in Aesthetics
(e.g. language, science, technology)? What
This is an advanced seminar in aesthetics that
PHI 521: Contemporary Moral Issues
does art offer that philosophy does not, and
focuses on a single question that arises in
This examination of the radical nature of
vice-versa? In what ways does the gender or
the philosophy of art. This question may be
traditional moral theory in its contemporary
racial identity of the artist affect the creation
approached through the writings of a single
applications will look at the ideas of Mill,
of the work? What are the cultural, social, and author, or else by consulting texts of several
Kant, and Aristotle as variations on traditional
political dimensions of the art work and its
thinkers (including practicing artists as well
Judeo-Christian moral theory. Students will
reception?
as philosophers). Examples of such questions
write short papers on contemporary moral
would be: What is the place of form in art?
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
issues as these are portrayed in short fiction.
How does emotion figure into the creation or
May be repeated for credit.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
appreciation of art? To be taught on the main
campus by a regular faculty member. Ideally,
PHI 507: Inquiries into Art Criticism
PHI 535: Political Philosophy
this course would be taken during the second
and Theory
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

182

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
This course will take up classics of political
philosophy and discuss contemporary
social life and ideologies in the light of the
theoretical frameworks they have achieved.
Readings and assignments will be drawn from
such exemplary works as Plato's Republic,
Aristotle's Politics, Machiavelli's The Prince,
Hobbes's Leviathan, Locke's Second Treatise
of Government, and Marx's Communist
Manifesto.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring 2021
Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHI 571: American Philosophy:
Philosophical Foundations of American
Politics
Readings from Emerson, C.S. Peirce, G.H.
Mead, W. James, G. Santayana, J. Dewey, J.H.
Randall, and J. Buchler will give the student
a grasp of the classic American tradition in
philosophy and the plural strands that go to
make it up, such as: the turn from idealism to
semioticism, neo-realsim and critical realism,
pragmatism and pragmaticism, the historical
interest and the social interest, individualism
and voluntarism, and the centrality of art and
science in human affairs.

PHI 553: Philosophy of Education
The purpose of the course is to develop
curricula which not only bridge educational
gaps but which also develop within all
students a sense of civil responsibility toward
community issues and problems. This course
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
critically examines such issues of ethnicity and
PHI 572: ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY
race, family systems, affirmative action, and
multiculturalism through the vehicle of Asian
American studies.
PHI 575: Philosophy of Religion
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Several aspects of the Judeo-Christian tradition
raise philosophical questions worthy of further
PHI 555: Perspectives on the Person
reflection and consideration. The first is the
The focus of this course will be the question of relation of religious faith to other sorts of
how the results of current research are related
knowledge and commitment: is religious
to our understanding of human development
belief more like belief in scientific experts or
and whether they require us to revise our
more like belief in one's spouse? A second
understanding of what a person is. Readings
is what sort of God is worth believing in and
from classic philosophical texts, such as Plato, whether we can talk intelligibly about the
Locke, Kant, and from contemporary research deity. The third is whether and how any God
in philosophy, psychology and other relevant
worth believing in could be compatible with
sciences will be used. Offered as both CEI 587 the obvious ills of our world.
and PHI 555
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHI 576: ETHICS AND VALUES
PHI 562: Concepts and Methods in
Evolutionary Biology
The course aims at achieving two related
objectives: first, to provide graduate students
in Ecology & Evolution and other biology
departments, as well as Philosophy, with a
basic understanding of the varied methods
(both experimental and statistical) that make
up the body of evolutionary quantitative
biology. The focus will be in particular on
quantitative genetics and its interface with
more modern approaches, including QTL
mapping, bioinformatics and the various
"omics" (genomics, proteomics, etc.). Second,
students will become familiar with the
fundamental concepts of philosophy of science
particularly as they relate to the conceptual
analysis of the ideas that shape modern
evolutionary and ecological theory. In this
respect, the focus will be both on philosophical
concepts such as falsificationism, induction,
deduction, hypothesis testing and the nature
of evidence, as well as on the meaning of key
ideas in evolutionary ecology, like natural
selection, genetic drift, and constraints.

PHI 582: Philosophy of Art
The purpose of this course is to encourage
students to explore and enrich their aesthetic
experience through reading, analyzing,
discussing, and writing about various theories
put forth by philosophers in the western
tradition. Among topics to be considered
are representation, expression, form, the
aesthetic attitude, beauty, taste, criticism and
interpretation of art, and the relation of art to
other areas of experience. The course does not
assume previous familiarity with philosophy
or art; however, it does assume an intellectual
commitment to the examination of difficult
ideas. This course is offered as both CEI 573
and PHI 582.

PHI 595: DIRECTED RESEARCH
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
PHI 599: Master's Thesis Research
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
PHI 600: Ancient Philosophy
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 601: Medieval and/or Renaissance
Philosophy
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 602: Modern Philosophy
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 603: 19th-Century Philosophy
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 604: Special Topics in the History
of Philosophy
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 610: Philosophy and the Arts
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 611: Philosophy and Literature
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 612: Philosophy and Psychology
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 613: Philosophy and Politics
PHI 614: Philosophy and Linguistics
PHI 615: Philosophy and Feminism
Co-scheduled with WST 611.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 616: Philosophy and Technology
Co-scheduled with WST 611.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 617: Philosophy and
Environmental Studies
PHI 618: Philosophy and the Sciences

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHI 587: DIRECTED READINGS

PHI 619: Special Topics in Interface
Studies

PHI 588: DIRECTED RESEARCH

May be repeated for credit.

PHI 590: DIRECTED READINGS

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

183

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
PHI 620: Advanced Problems in
Philosophy
Delivery: Variable and repetitive credit

Spring 2021

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

PHI 637: Epistemology
A study of selected conceptions of the nature,
structure and content of knowledge, as found
in classical and contemporary theories of
knowledge.

PHI 621: Independent Study

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

May be repeated for credit.
PHI 622: Supervised Teaching
May be repeated for credit.

PHI 638: Philosophical Psychology
May be repeated for credit.

PHI 623: Teaching Practicum

PHI 639: Social and Political
Philosophy

May be repeated for credit.

May be repeated for credit.

PHI 624: New York Consortium Study
This course designation should be used by
students who enroll in seminars at participating
universities of the New York Consortium of
Graduate Schools. No more than six credits
of consortium study (and none for first-year
students at Stony Brook) may count toward
the fulfillment of requirements in the doctoral
program.

PHI 640: Ethics

Prereguisite: Completion of first year in
doctoral program (Philosophy)
Fall, 1-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 625: Prospectus Seminar
This seminar is taken by all doctoral students
in the Spring semester of their third year.
The primary goal is to have each write a
dissertation proposal.
Spring, 3 credits, S/U grading
PHI 630: Seminar in Continental
Philosophy
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 631: Seminar in Analytic
Philosophy
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 632: Seminar in Comparative
Philosophy
PHI 633: American Pragmatism and
Naturalism
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
PHI 634: Eastern Philosophy
PHI 635: Philosophy of Science and
Logic
PHI 636: Metaphysics

PHI 641: Aesthetics
PHI 642: Philosophy of Religion
PHI 643: Semiotics
PHI 644: Special Topics in
Contemporary Philosophy
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Prerequisite: Advancement to candidacy (G5).
Major portion of research must take place on
SBU campus, at Cold Spring Harbor, or at the
Brookhaven National Lab.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
in MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.
All international students must received
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 800: Full Time Summer Research
0 credits, S/U grading
S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

PHI
Philosophy
PHI 500: Feminist Theories
This course is designed to introduce students
to the most recent developments in feminist
theory, covering different currents as well
as traditions. The seminar may focus on
moral and political questions, the intersection
between the social and the psychological, or
culture and representation as it is negotiated
in different cultural media (film, literature,
architecture, music, etc.)
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 501: Theories of Race
This course is designed to introduce the
student to different currents of analyses of
race and racism. It focuses particularly on
the relationship between philosophy and the
development, legitimacy and legimation of
racial categories. The seminar may focus on
moral and political philosophy, questions of
epistemology or metaphysics, the intersections
between the social and the psychological, or
culture and representations of raced subjects as
they are negotiated in different cultural media
(film, literature, architecture, music, etc.)
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 503: Theories of Ethnicity
This course focuses on the category of
ethnicity. Using an inter-cultural, comparative
and historical approach, it seeks to expose
the student to the uses and misuses of this
category. The category of ethnicity will also be
studied in conjunctions with questions relating
to individual identity, national, cultural and
184

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
civilizational identities. Ethnicity, like Race
and Gender, is one of the most fundamental
markers of identity. Using interdisciplinary
and comparative methods and perspectives,
ethnicity's role in the constitutions of identities
will be studied.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 504: Intersections of Race,
Ethinicity, and Gender
This course, which is analogous to an honors
senior seminar, seeks to integrate into a
productive dialogue the different methods,
traditions and perspectives used to analyze
Race, Ethnicity, and Gender, while also
juxtaposing and comparing the similarities and
differences between them. The approach, as in
the whole program, will be inderdisciplinary
and comparative.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 505: Core Course in Philosophy
and the Arts: History of Aesthetic
Theory
The basic course will investigate some of the
most important and influential theories of art
in the West from Plato to the present. Readings
and discussion in depth of major figures
will make up the content of the course: e.g.,
Plato, Aristotle, Kant, Hegel, Schopenhauer,
Nietzsche, Heidegger, Collingwood, Langer,
Merleau-Ponty, Dufrenne. The focus
throughout will be on central issues in
aesthetics such as imitation, truth, beauty,
expression, emotion, and imagination.
Fall, Spring, every year, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 506: Art and Its Problems
A consideration of basic problems in the
creation and appreciation of art. What is the
creative process? Who is the artist? How is
art to be compared with other symbolic forms
(e.g. language, science, technology)? What
does art offer that philosophy does not, and
vice-versa? In what ways does the gender or
racial identity of the artist affect the creation
of the work? What are the cultural, social, and
political dimensions of the art work and its
reception?

Spring 2021
Critique of Judgement, Hegel's Lectures on
The Philiosophy of Art, Adorno's Aesthetic
Theory, Collingwood's Principles of Art,
Langer's Feeling and Form, Dewey's Art as
Experience, Heidegger's "The Origin of the
Work of Art", and Danto's Transfiguration of
the Commonplace.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 507: Inquiries into Art Criticism
and Theory
This course deals with the theoretical
approaches to the study of art that cross
historical boundaries. Topics vary from
semester to semester. They may be an
expansion of one of the areas generally
covered in ARH 540, such as psychology of
art or the iconography of architecture. Other
investigations may focus on subjects requiring
a special methodological approach, such as the
theory and history of ornament and design or
the role of public art.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 508: Contemporary Issues in the
Arts
With an eye on artworks accessible in
the public sphere - museums, galleries,
concerts, readings, dance performances, film
- philosophical questions will be raised: Why
these works now? How do they compare with
their predecessors? What do they portend
for the future of art? Visits to the sites and
performances of such works will be integrated
into an ongoing discussion of the issues they
raise within the context of aesthetic theory
- and what new theories they suggest. This
course will be co-scheduled with ITL571,
FRN571, and EGL603
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

PHI 509: Special Seminar in Aesthetics
This is an advanced seminar in aesthetics that
focuses on a single question that arises in
the philosophy of art. This question may be
approached through the writings of a single
author, or else by consulting texts of several
thinkers (including practicing artists as well
as philosophers). Examples of such questions
would be: What is the place of form in art?
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
How does emotion figure into the creation or
May be repeated for credit.
appreciation of art? To be taught on the main
campus by a regular faculty member. Ideally,
PHI 507: Aesthetic System
A concentrated reading of a single major work, this course would be taken during the second
year of master's degree work at Stony Brook
with attention both to its detailed structure
Manhattan.
and to its larger significance. Candidates for
such reading include Aristotle's Poetics, Kant's
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Fall, Spring, every year, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 510: Ancient Philosophy
An in-depth reading of few fundamental texts
of classical antiquity that conceptualize mind/
soul as object of rational investigation. These
ancient theories contain within themselves all
the principal elements of later philosophies
of mind. This course aims at making these
elements explicit through the study of the
following: Anaxagoras, selected fragments
on "mind"; Plato, Republic (selection) and
Phaedo; Aristotle, De Anima (Peri Psyche);
Marcus Aurelius, The Meditations; Lucretius,
On the Nature of Things. 3 credits, ABCF
grading, offered Fall/Spring alternate years
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHI 511: Modern Philosophy
This is an advanced course that investigates
pivotal connections between seventeenth and
eighteenth-century theories of knowledge,
metaphysics, aesthetics, and ethics. It surveys
key developments in these areas of philosophic
inquiry during the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. It also involves careful explicative
work on texts written by major thinkers of
the period, e.g., Descartes, Locke, Leibniz,
Spinoza, Malebranch, Shaftesbury, Hutcheson,
Hume, Rousseau, and Kant.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHI 520: Advanced Studies in
Philosophy
Investigations into specialty areas led and
directed by accomplished philosophers in
the discipline involved. Instructor consent
required. No more than six credits of PHI 520
may count towards the fulfillment of degree
requirements in the MA program.
Offered:
Fall, Spring, Summer, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 521: Contemporary Moral Issues
This examination of the radical nature of
traditional moral theory in its contemporary
applications will look at the ideas of Mill,
Kant, and Aristotle as variations on traditional
Judeo-Christian moral theory. Students will
write short papers on contemporary moral
issues as these are portrayed in short fiction.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHI 535: Political Philosophy
This course will take up classics of political
philosophy and discuss contemporary
social life and ideologies in the light of the
185

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
theoretical frameworks they have achieved.
Readings and assignments will be drawn from
such exemplary works as Plato's Republic,
Aristotle's Politics, Machiavelli's The Prince,
Hobbes's Leviathan, Locke's Second Treatise
of Government, and Marx's Communist
Manifesto.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring 2021
PHI 571: American Philosophy:
Philosophical Foundations of American
Politics
Readings from Emerson, C.S. Peirce, G.H.
Mead, W. James, G. Santayana, J. Dewey, J.H.
Randall, and J. Buchler will give the student
a grasp of the classic American tradition in
philosophy and the plural strands that go to
make it up, such as: the turn from idealism to
semioticism, neo-realsim and critical realism,
pragmatism and pragmaticism, the historical
interest and the social interest, individualism
and voluntarism, and the centrality of art and
science in human affairs.

PHI 553: Philosophy of Education
The purpose of the course is to develop
curricula which not only bridge educational
gaps but which also develop within all
students a sense of civil responsibility toward
community issues and problems. This course
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
critically examines such issues of ethnicity and
race, family systems, affirmative action, and
PHI 572: ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY
multiculturalism through the vehicle of Asian
American studies.
PHI 575: Philosophy of Religion
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Several aspects of the Judeo-Christian tradition
raise philosophical questions worthy of further
PHI 555: Perspectives on the Person
reflection and consideration. The first is the
The focus of this course will be the question of relation of religious faith to other sorts of
how the results of current research are related
knowledge and commitment: is religious
to our understanding of human development
belief more like belief in scientific experts or
and whether they require us to revise our
more like belief in one's spouse? A second
understanding of what a person is. Readings
is what sort of God is worth believing in and
from classic philosophical texts, such as Plato, whether we can talk intelligibly about the
Locke, Kant, and from contemporary research deity. The third is whether and how any God
in philosophy, psychology and other relevant
worth believing in could be compatible with
sciences will be used. Offered as both CEI 587 the obvious ills of our world.
and PHI 555
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHI 576: ETHICS AND VALUES
PHI 562: Concepts and Methods in
Evolutionary Biology
PHI 582: Philosophy of Art
The course aims at achieving two related
The purpose of this course is to encourage
objectives: first, to provide graduate students
students to explore and enrich their aesthetic
in Ecology & Evolution and other biology
experience through reading, analyzing,
departments, as well as Philosophy, with a
discussing, and writing about various theories
basic understanding of the varied methods
put forth by philosophers in the western
(both experimental and statistical) that make
tradition. Among topics to be considered
up the body of evolutionary quantitative
are representation, expression, form, the
biology. The focus will be in particular on
aesthetic attitude, beauty, taste, criticism and
quantitative genetics and its interface with
interpretation of art, and the relation of art to
more modern approaches, including QTL
other areas of experience. The course does not
mapping, bioinformatics and the various
assume previous familiarity with philosophy
"omics" (genomics, proteomics, etc.). Second,
or art; however, it does assume an intellectual
students will become familiar with the
commitment to the examination of difficult
fundamental concepts of philosophy of science
ideas. This course is offered as both CEI 573
particularly as they relate to the conceptual
and PHI 582.
analysis of the ideas that shape modern
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
evolutionary and ecological theory. In this
respect, the focus will be both on philosophical
PHI 587: DIRECTED READINGS
concepts such as falsificationism, induction,
deduction, hypothesis testing and the nature
PHI 588: DIRECTED RESEARCH
of evidence, as well as on the meaning of key
ideas in evolutionary ecology, like natural
selection, genetic drift, and constraints.
PHI 590: DIRECTED READINGS
Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

PHI 595: DIRECTED RESEARCH

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
PHI 599: Master's Thesis Research
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
PHI 600: Ancient Philosophy
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 601: Medieval and/or Renaissance
Philosophy
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 602: Modern Philosophy
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 603: 19th-Century Philosophy
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 604: Special Topics in the History
of Philosophy
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 610: Philosophy and the Arts
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 611: Philosophy and Literature
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 612: Philosophy and Psychology
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 613: Philosophy and Politics
PHI 614: Philosophy and Linguistics
PHI 615: Philosophy and Feminism
Co-scheduled with WST 611.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 616: Philosophy and Technology
Co-scheduled with WST 611.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 617: Philosophy and
Environmental Studies
PHI 618: Philosophy and the Sciences
PHI 619: Special Topics in Interface
Studies
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 620: Advanced Problems in
Philosophy
Delivery: Variable and repetitive credit
186

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

in classical and contemporary theories of
knowledge.

PHI 621: Independent Study

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

May be repeated for credit.
PHI 622: Supervised Teaching
May be repeated for credit.

PHI 638: Philosophical Psychology
May be repeated for credit.

PHI 623: Teaching Practicum

PHI 639: Social and Political
Philosophy

May be repeated for credit.

May be repeated for credit.

PHI 624: New York Consortium Study
This course designation should be used by
students who enroll in seminars at participating
universities of the New York Consortium of
Graduate Schools. No more than six credits
of consortium study (and none for first-year
students at Stony Brook) may count toward
the fulfillment of requirements in the doctoral
program.

PHI 640: Ethics

Prereguisite: Completion of first year in
doctoral program (Philosophy)
Fall, 1-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

PHI 644: Special Topics in
Contemporary Philosophy

PHI 625: Prospectus Seminar
This seminar is taken by all doctoral students
in the Spring semester of their third year.
The primary goal is to have each write a
dissertation proposal.
Spring, 3 credits, S/U grading
PHI 630: Seminar in Continental
Philosophy
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 631: Seminar in Analytic
Philosophy
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 632: Seminar in Comparative
Philosophy

PHI 641: Aesthetics
PHI 642: Philosophy of Religion
PHI 643: Semiotics

May be repeated for credit.
PHI 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Prerequisite: Advancement to candidacy (G5).
Major portion of research must take place on
SBU campus, at Cold Spring Harbor, or at the
Brookhaven National Lab.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.

PHI 633: American Pragmatism and
Naturalism

Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.

PHI 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
in MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are

PHI 634: Eastern Philosophy
PHI 635: Philosophy of Science and
Logic
PHI 636: Metaphysics
PHI 637: Epistemology
A study of selected conceptions of the nature,
structure and content of knowledge, as found

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.
All international students must received
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PHI 800: Full Time Summer Research
0 credits, S/U grading
S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

PHY
Physics
PHY 501: Classical Mechanics
Analytical classical mechanics including
Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formulations
and the Hamilton-Jacoby theory. Variational
principles, symmetries and conservative
laws. Selected advanced problems such
as parametric and nonlinear oscillations,
planetary motion, classical theory of scattering,
rigid body rotation, and deterministic chaos.
Basic notions of elasticity theory and fluid
dynamics.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 503: Methods of Mathematical
Physics I
A selection of mathematical techniques
useful for physicists. Topics are selected
from: linear algebra, complex variables,
differential equations, asymptotic analysis,
special functions, boundary value problems,
integral transforms, perturbation theory as
applied to linear and nonlinear systems. This
course should be taken by entering graduate
students seeking enrichment in these areas.
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 504: Computational Methods in
Physics and Astrophysics
An introduction to procedural and objectoriented programming in a high-level language
such as C++ or modern Fortran with examples
and assignments consisting of rudimentary
algorithms for problems in physics and
astronomy. Students will use the UNIX/
Linux operating system to write programs and
manage data, and the course will include an
introduction to parallel computing and good
programming practices such as version control
and verification. The course will prepare

187

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

students for courses in algorithms and methods familiar with most of the experimental
that assume a knowledge of programming.
research instrumentation in the department.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
PHY 505: Classical Electrodynamics
Electrostatics and Magnetostatics in
vacuum and medium; Green's functions;
Maxwell's equations and gauge invariance;
Electromagnetic wave propagation; Radiation,
scattering, interference, and diffraction;
Special relativity; Radiation by relativistic
charges; Additional topics as time permits.
Three lecture hours plus two recitation hours
per week.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 510: Introduction to Nonlinear
Dynamics
This course concentrates on developing the
tools used to analyze models of dynamical
systems associated with physical phenomena,
such as coupled electrical mechanical,
chemical and biological oscillators, amplitude
equations, symplectic maps, etc. There is a
discussion of the basic theorems, as well as
methods used to derive perturbation solutions
for differential equations and maps using the
method of normal forms.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
PHY 511: Quantum Mechanics I
First course in a two-part sequence.
Topics include basic quantum physics and
mathematical apparatus; application to one
dimensional examples and simple systems.
Symmetries, angular momentum, and spin.
Additional topics as time permits.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 512: Quantum Mechanics II
Second course in a two-part sequence,
covering variational principles, perturbation
theory, relativistic quantum mechanics,
quantization of the radiation field, many-body
systems. Application to atoms, solids, nuclei
and elementary particles, as time permits.

Fall or Spring, 3 credits, S/U grading
PHY 515: Methods of Experimental
Research I
An experimental course required for all
graduate students. The goal of the course is to
provide firsthand experience with the nature
of experimental work. For students oriented
toward theory, the course gives a background
for reading and evaluating experimental
papers. The course is based on classic
measurements in nuclear, particle, atomic,
condensed matter physics, and astronomy.
Students can gain experience in handling
cryogenic liquids, vacuum systems, lasers,
pulse counting and coincidence methods,
resonance measurements, and electronic
instrumentation, such as lock-in amplifiers,
particle detectors, coincidence counters,
computer control, etc. Numerical analysis of
data, presentation of results in written, graphic,
and oral form, and meaningful comparison of
experiments and theory are part of the course.
Working alone or with, at most, one partner,
each student must do one experiment from
each of four different groups.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
PHY 517: Laboratory Course in
Astronomical Techniques
A course designed to introduce the theory,
design, and operation of modern astronomical
instrumentation and to familiarize the
student with the use of telescopes. Current
astronomical techniques will be discussed
with emphasis on methods of observational
measurements and reduction of data. Emphasis
is given on optical techniques appropriate
for wavelengths shorter than one micron.
Extensive laboratory and observing exercises
may be expected.
Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

PHY 518: Applications of Synchroton
Radiation
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
An introduction to the principles of
etc.)
synchrotron radiation is followed by a series
of lectures given by graduate faculty and guest
PHY 514: Current Research
lecturers with expertise in using synchrotron
Instruments
radiation for research in physics, chemistry,
In a series of distinct units, various members
materials science, biology and medicine.
of the experimental research faculty describe
Most of these presentations are followed
the nature of their work, explain the major
by hands-on experience with synchrotron
principles of their laboratory instruments,
instrumentation at Brookhaven National
discuss how these instrument systems function, Laboratory. Access to user facilities, including
and conduct tours of their laboratories showing safety requirements, preparation of user
the apparatus in action. The student becomes
proposals, user training and other issues, and
also covered.
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
PHY 521: Stars
A study of the atmospheres, interiors, and
evolution of stars. The contact between theory
and observations is emphasized. Stellar
atmospheres in hydrostatic and radiative
equilibrium described. Models for the
calculation of stellar spectra are discussed.
Stellar winds are studied. Next, theoretical
studies of stellar interiors and evolution,
including equations of state, energy transport,
and nuclear energy generation, are developed.
Structures of main sequence, red giant, premain sequence, and white dwarves are studied
and compared to observations. The evolution
of single stars up to supernovae and the
peculiar evolution of close binary systems are
also studied.
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 522: Interstellar Medium
A study of the interstellar medium with
emphasis on physical processes. Topics
include kinetic theory, equation of transfer,
spectral lines, non-thermal emission, ionization
effects of dust, and formation and spectroscopy
of molecular clouds. The components of
the interstellar medium and the interactions
between them are discussed in detail, as well
as the process of star formation.
Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 523: Galaxies
A basic course on the observational and
theoretical aspects of the content, morphology,
kinematics, and dynamics of galaxies. Topics
include the size, shape, and location of the sun
in the Milky Way; stellar populations; the disk
and spheroidal components; galactic rotation;
distance determination in the Milky Way and
to external galaxies; galaxy classification and
the Hubble Law. Theoretical topics center
on stellar dynamics, including potential
theory; stellar orbits; and spiral structure. The
course also includes a brief introduction to
cosmology.
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 524: Cosmology
A basic course on cosmology: Hubble
expansion, Friedmann universes, age of the
universe, microwave background radiation,
big-bang nucleosynthesis, inflation, growth
of gravitational instabilities and galaxy
formation, correlation functions, local density
and velocity perturbations, and dark matter.

188

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Prerequisite: PHY 523 or permission of
instructor
Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 529: Quantum Electronics
Introduction to modern atomic physics for the
laser era for graduate students. Emphasis on
the interaction between atoms and light, as
well as on atomic structure and how it affects
this interaction. Modern applications such
as laser cooling, atom trapping, precision
spectroscopy with frequency comb, quantum
information, and others will be discussed. Not
for satisfying physics Ph.D. breadth course
requirements. Spring every year, 1-3 credits,
ABCF grading
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 534: Radio Astronomy
Topics covered include continuum and
spectral-line radio astronomy. Within
the Milky Way Galaxy topics include
the interstellar medium, the physics and
kinematics of molecular clouds, star formation
in giant molecular clouds, chemistry of
molecular clouds, galactic structure, spiral
structure, and pulsars. Extragalactic topics
include radio galaxies and jets, radio loud
quasars, molecular and atomic gas in galaxies,
luminous infrared galaxies, the missing
mass problem in spiral galaxies, and cosmic
microwave background radiation. Radio
astronomy measurement techniques for single
telescopes and aperture synthesis techniques
are also covered, although the emphasis is on
scientific results.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 1-3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 536: The Physics of Free Electron
Lasers
The purpose of this course is to introduce the
students to the physics of Free Electron Lasers
and Synchrotron Radiation. This course is
suitable for graduate students who want to
learn more about Free Electron Lasers and
Synchrotron Radiation physics.
Offered: Summer, 1-2 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 537: Measurement and Control of
Charged Particle Beams
The course provides a comprehensive and
systematic review of the methods used for
measurement, correction, and control of
charged particle beams in modern particle
accelerators. By way of illustration, theoretical
principles are applied in the evaluation
of experimental data obtained at various
accelerator laboratories including CERN,
BNL, DESY, SLAC, IUCF, KEK, LBNL,

Spring 2021
and FNAL. This course aims to bridge the
link between experimental observations and
theoretical principles in accelerator physics.
Upon completion of this course, the students
are expected to be able to apply the principles
and methods presented to their research.
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 538: Cyclotrons: Beam Dynamics
and Design
Cyclotrons are circular machines where a
fixed magnetic field bends particles through a
spiraling path that maintains resonance with
RF accelerating fields. They are attractive
for particle acceleration where efficiency of
conversion from electric power to beam power
is a figure of merit. Cyclotrons historically
drove many advances in high energy and
nuclear physics and have seen a recent
resurgence for radioisotope production,
medical treatment facilities, and industrial
applications. This course provides students
with an introduction to the physics of charged
particle dynamics in cyclotrons and their
design. Students will learn how to calculate
cyclotron orbits from a given magnetic field
configuration, predict the space charge and
brightness limits, and devise mitigation for
betatron resonances.
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 539: Laser Applications to Particle
Accelerators
Lasers have become essential tools widely
used in the world of accelerators and particle
beams with applications ranging from
high quality electron and ion sources, to
sophisticated beam diagnostics. This course is
an introduction to the basic laser technology,
with the focus on applications of the laser
techniques in areas of particle accelerators.
Upon completion of this course, the students
are expected to understand the basic laser
techniques, laser beam interactions, become
familiar with use of lasers for beam diagnostics
and beam manipulations, and gain useful
hands-on experience with laser simulations and
lab work.
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 540: Statistical Mechanics
Brief review of thermodynamics, principles of
physical statistics, systems of non-interacting
particles: Boltzmann, Fermi-Dirac, and BoseEinstein statistics. Applications to ideal gases,
electrons and phonons in solids, and black
body radiation. Approximate treatment of nonideal gases. First-order and second-order phase
transitions. Ising model, transfer matrix, and
renormalization group approach. Fluctuations
in thermal equilibrium, fluctuation-dissipation
theorem, brief review of non-equilibrium

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

fluctuations. Basic notions of ergodicity,
classical and quantum chaos.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
PHY 541: Advanced Statistical
Mechanics
Topics are selected from cluster expansions,
elementary theory of quantum fluids,
phase transitions, transfer matrix, Ising
and ferroelectric models, polymers and
membranes, disordered systems, and
fluctuation and nonequilibrium phenomena.
Fall, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
PHY 542: Fundamentals of Accelerator
Physics and Technology with
Simulations and Measurements Lab
This course is an introduction to the underlying
principles and uses of the nearly 14,000
particle accelerators that are used worldwide
in medicine, industry, and scientific research.
The course is suitable for senior undergraduate
and entry-level graduate students in physics
and engineering or students from other fields
with a particular interest in accelerator-based
science.
Summer, 1-2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
PHY 543: RF Superconductivity for
Particle Accelerators
This graduate level course covers application
of superconducting radio frequency
(SRF) technology to contemporary high-ß
accelerators: storage rings, pulsed and CW
linacs, including energy recovery linacs
(ERLs). The course will address physics
and engineering aspects of using SRF in
accelerators. It will cover beam-cavity
interactions issues specific to superconducting
cavities, a systems approach to designing SRF
systems and engineering of superconducting
cavity cryomodules. The course is intended
for graduate students pursuing accelerator
physics and graduate engineers and physicists
who want to familiarize themselves with
superconducting RF systems.
Fall, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
PHY 544: Spin Dynamics in Particle
Accelerators
Polarization is a possible property of charged
particle beams, which has been used and
developed from the early times of particle
accelerator developments. It is a property of
paramount interest in future nuclear and high
energy physics accelerator projects, as well
as in several existing accelerator facilities.
189

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Polarization requires sophisticated beam
and spin manipulations, from production to
utilization, based on dedicated accelerator
design rules and technological components.
This course will introduce students to
the dynamics of spin in charged particle
accelerators, and to the accelerator components
and spin manipulation techniques which enable
and allow preserving beam polarization. The
course material will provide the basic tools
for the design of practical polarized beam
accelerator components and structures, and
will convey an understanding of the essential
underlying physics of polarized beams.
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 545: Practical Issues in Cyclotron
Design and Construc.
Cyclotrons are versatile accelerators whose use
continues to expand in basic research, industry,
medicine, and education. This course provides
students with an introduction to the physics
and technology of cyclotrons and their design.
Issues associated with the construction of
practical facilities for prototypical applications
are reviewed. Upon completion of this course,
students are expected to apply cyclotron theory
and practical constraints to propose a complete
cyclotron design for a prototypical application.
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 546: Python for Scientific
Computing
Python has seen wide adoption in the scientific
community for data analysis, simulation,
prototyping and visualization. It provided
a simple, yet powerful means to build
applications. This seminar introduces python
and its use in scientific computing. Students
will learn the standard python libraries for
array manipulation, visualization, numerical
analysis and symbolic mathematics, as well as
how to interface python with other languages,
build applications, and good software
engineering practices (including version
control and testing). Students are encouraged
to share examples for their discipline
0-1 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 547: Classical Mechanics and
E&M in Accelerator Physics
The course focuses on the topics of classical
mechanics and electrodynamics that are
of importance for accelerator physics. On
completion of this course, students are
expected to have a broad understanding of the
dynamics of particles in electromagnetic fields
as well as the physical principles that underpin
particle accelerator technology. Along with
the graduate-level PHY554 Fundamentals
of Accelerator Physics course, this course is
intended to prepare students for specialized

Spring 2021
USPAS courses and advanced study of cutting- PHY 552: Nuclear Physics II
edge accelerator topics.
Nucleon-nucleon scattering and effective
range approximation; the nucleon-nucleon
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
interaction calculated from meson exchange;
PHY 548: Timing and Synchronization effective forces between nucleons in nuclei
for Accelerators
and nuclear matter; the renormalization
Course Description: This course is intended for group approach to these interactions; Fermiaccelerator physicists who are interested in the liquid theory of the nuclear many-body
design of timing systems and synchronization problem; thermodynamics of hadrons at
high temperature; RHIC physics with heavy
techniques for particle accelerators and light
ions including transition from hadrons
sources. The course focuses on transmission,
to quark gluon plasma, restoration of
measurement and control of highspeed
chiral symmetry, equation of state, initial
electromagnetic signals in transmission lines
conditions, thermodynamics of hadrons at high
or waveguides, whether RF/microwave or
temperature.
optical. These systems are important in the
distribution of timing reference information
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
in accelerating systems, and diagnostic
techniques to measure beams with respect
PHY 554: Fundamentals of Accelerator
to RF or ultrafast pulse signals. Examples
Physics
include ultrafast pump/probe experiments in
History of accelerators, basic principles
accelerator-based light sources, or diagnostics including centre of mass energy, luminosity,
for short particle bunches. The course enables accelerating gradient; Characteristics of
students to understand how precise timing
modern colliders: RHIC, LEP, LHC, bsignals are transmitted and used in state-offactories; Transverse motion, principles
the-art systems. Concepts and technology for
of beam cooling, Strong focusing, simple
subpicosecond, and even sub-femtosecond
lattices; Circulating beams, synchrotron
synchronization of ultrafast pulse optical
radiation; Longitutdinal dynamics; Nonsources, RF, and particle beams will be
linearities and resonances; Radio Frequency
discussed.
cavities, superconductivity in accelerators;
Applications of accelerators: light sources,
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
medical uses, Future Accelerators: eRHIC,
PHY 549: Optimization and Machine
ILC, neutrino factories, muon collider, laser
Learning for Accelerators
plasma acceleration.
Optimization techniques are key to both the
Offered
design and operation of contemporary charged Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
particle accelerator systems. In addition,
machine learning techniques are now being
PHY 555: Solid-State Physics I
increasingly used, either to augment the
This course concentrates on the basic notions
capabilities of standard optimization (e.g.
of solid state physics, treated mostly within
through surrogate modeling), or to address
the single-particle approximation. Main topics
entirely new tasks (e.g. anomaly detection,
include: crystal lattices and symmetries,
fault classification). This course will introduce reciprocal lattice and state counting, phonons,
a number of optimization and machine
electron energy band theory, bonding and
learning techniques that are commonly used
cohesion (semi-quantitatively), electron
for particle accelerators, as well as their range dynamics and electron transport in metals
of applicability and limitations.
and semiconductors, screening, optical
properties of solids, and an introduction to
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
superconductivity and magnetism.
PHY 551: Nuclear Physics I
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Nucleon structure, conservation laws and the
static quark model; nuclear force and the two
PHY 556: Solid State Physics II
nucleon system; bulk properties of nuclear
The course focuses on the many-particle
matter, charge distribution, spin, isospin, mass, aspects of solid state physics addressing
alpha decay, nuclear fission; electromagnetic
classical topics such as superconductivity
and weak interaction; collective motion;
and the transport properties of disordered
microscopic models of the nucleus; nuclear
conductors, as well as more modern subjects
matter under extreme conditions, high
including the fractional quantum Hall
rotational states, heavy ion physics at RHIC,
effect, dissipative quantum mechanics, and
nuclear astrophysics.
problems of mesoscoptic physics. Both
phenomenological and theoretical descriptions
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
are discussed.
etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

190

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
PHY 557: Elementary Particle Physics
Introduction to elementary particle physics.
Symmetries and invariance in particle
physics. The properties of particles in terms of
quarks and leptons and their interactions. An
introduction to the electroweak and for strong
interactions. Interactions at high energies.
Interactions between particles and matter,
experiments in particle and experimental
results. Survey of particle accelerators.

Spring 2021
and their behaviors; How networks evolve:
Preferential attachment, rewiring; Power
laws; Fluxed through networks; Information
and communication, entropy; Metabolic flux
analysis; Artificial and Natural selection
for traits; Darwinian evolution; Population
dynamics.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

PHY 561: Biology for Physical
Scientists
Topics of this course include but are not
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, restricted to: Overview of living things;
Six kingdoms, animal phyla. Physiology
B+, etc.)
and organs; Chemistry of life; Noncovalent
PHY 558: Physical Biology
interactions; Hydrogen bonds; Solvation;
Biochemistry: reactions, catalysis, ATP amino
Topics of this course include but are
acids, nucleic acids, lipids; Cell structures:
not limited to: Time and space in cells;
Nucleus, mitochondria, chromosomes,
Structural basis of biology; Molecular
membranes; Basic paradigm: DNA makes
solvation and lattice models; Chemical
RNA makes protein; How cell machines and
potential; Electrostatics, potentials, dipoles,
electrochemical potentials[ Poisson-Boltzmann circuits work; Cell cycle; The processes of
evolution; Genetics and heredity; Diseases:
and Born models; Acids, bases and salts;
how biological systems fail; How drugs
Intermolecular potentials and force fields;
are discovered; Tight-binding inhibitors;
Phase transitions; Lattice and Ising models;
Antibodies; Current research: Cell division
Adsorption; Binding polynomials; Binding
cooperativity; Semigrand ensemble, molecular and cancer, genomics, bioinformatics, high
throughput sequencing, systems and synthetic
machines; Molecular motors, energy
biology.
conversion and transduction; Polymer theory;
Flory-Huggins; Random flights; Elasticity;
Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
Helix-coil theory; Collapse transitions; Protein etc.)
folding equilibria; Protein folding kinetics;
Sequence space; Protein evolution; Protein
PHY 562: Lasers and Modern Optics
elasticity and biological mechanics of proteins; Introduction to the theory of lasers including
Biophysics of the cell; Proteome stabilities,
resonance conditions, normal modes, optical
aggregation, kinetics.
cavities and elementary quantum mechanics.
Description of types of lasers, methods of
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
control, limitations of power, precision,
etc.)
wavelength, etc. Applications to research and
PHY 559: Biological Dynamics and
industry. Throughout the course, there will be
Networks
many problems that involve writing computer
programs to solve simple differential equations
This course will provide a solid foundation
and model different aspects of laser operation.
in key theoretical concepts for the study of
Not for satisfying physics Ph.D. breadth course
dynamics in biological systems and networks
requirements.
at different scales ranging from the molecular
level to metabolic and gene regulatory
Fall, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
networks. Topics of this course include
etc.)
but are not limited to: Physical kinetics;
Diffusion/Smoluchowskii; Random flights;
PHY 564: Advanced Accelerator
Waiting times; Poisson; Brownian ratchets;
Physics
Chemical kinetics; Transition states; Stability, Types and Components of Accelerators,
bifurcations, pattern development; Noise
Relativistic Mechanics and EM for
in cells: intrinsic and Extrinsic; Feedback;
Accelerators, Accelerator Hamiltonian
Biological Osciillators; Recurrence, period
and N-dimensional phase space, Poincare
doubling, chaos; Networks; Topologies;
diagrams, Lie algebras and symplectic maps
Degree distribution, betweenness; Models of
and matrices; exact parameterization of linear
nets: Erdos-Renyi, scale-free, social, Wattsmotion in accelerators; matrix functions,
Strogatz, agents; Robustness, highly-optimized Sylvester's formula; non-linear effects,
tolerance, bowties, epidemics; Biological
Collective instabilities & Landau Damping,
networks: Protein-protein nets, regulatory and Radiation damping and Excitation, natural
metabolic nets; Known biological circuits
Emittance; Spin motion in accelerators.
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 565: Quantum Electronics I:
Atomic Physics
Quantum electronics is a synthesis of quantum
physics and electrical engineering, and is
introduced in two independent semesters. A
description of simple atoms and molecules and
their interaction with radiation includes atoms
in strong and/or weak external fields, twophoton spectroscopy, superradiance, Rydberg
states, lasers and laser spec-troscopy, coherent
transients, etc.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
PHY 566: Quantum Electronics II:
Quantum Optics
Quantum electronics is a synthesis of quantum
physics and electrical engineering, and is
introduced in two independent semesters. This
course focuses on the quantum properties of
light. The quantized electromagnetic field
and its correlations are used to understand
nonclassical states from various sources such
as two-level atoms and nonlinear systems
interacting with radiation fields.
Fall, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
PHY 567: Theoretical Chemical
Physics
This course stresses the physical theory
underlying chemical phenomena. Special
emphasis is given to advanced topics in
electronic structure theory, molecular
dynamics, condensed matter and surfaces,
many-body and quantum ensemble theory, and
the interaction of light and molecules.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 570: Introductory Physics
Revisited for Teachers
This seminar allows students to explore the
fine points of topics normally covered in high
school physics. Not for PhD credit.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
PHY 571: Electromagnetic Theory for
Teachers
The course reviews vector calculus and
develops Maxwell's equations relating
electric and magnetic fields to their sources.
Applications for time-independent fields
are developed for solving boundary value
problems and the interactions of fields in bulk
matter. An oral presentation of a relevant topic
suitable for a high-school class is required. Not
for PhD credit.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
191

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
PHY 573: Mechanics for Teachers
The Newtonian formulation of classical
mechanics is reviewed and applied to more
advanced problems than those considered
in introductory physics. The Lagrangian
and Hamiltonian methods are then derived
from the Newtonian treatment and applied to
various problems. An oral presentation of a
relevant topic suitable for a high-school class
is required. Not for PhD credit.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 576: Thermodynamics and
Statistical Mechanics for Teachers
This course consists of two parts. Those
relations among the properties of systems
at thermal equilibrium that are independent
of a detailed microscopic understanding are
developed by use of the first and second
laws of thermodynamics. The concepts of
temperature, internal energy and entropy are
analyzed. The thermodynamic potentials are
introduced. Applications to a wide variety
of systems are made. The second portion of
the course, beginning with the kinetic theory
of gases, develops elementary statistical
mechanics, relates entropy and probability,
and treats simple examples in classical and
quantum statistics. An oral presentation of a
relevant topic suitable for a high-school class
is required. Not for PhD credit.

Spring 2021
The concepts, historical development and
mathematical methods of quantum mechanics.
Topics include Schroedinger's equation in
time-dependent and time-independent forms,
and one- and three-dimensional solutions,
including the treatment of angular momentum
and spin. Applications to simple systems,
especially the hydrogen atom, are stressed. An
oral presentation of a relevant topic suitable
for a high school class is required. Not for PhD
credit.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
PHY 579: Special Topics for Teachers
Topics of current interest to high school
teachers are discussed in order to bring the
teachers up to date on the latest developments
in various areas of research. Examples could
include the standard model of particle physics,
nanofabrication techniques, atomic force
microscopy, etc. Not for PhD credit.
Fall or Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
PHY 580: Special Research Projects
Research under the direction of a faculty
member. Not open to Ph.D. candidates.

May be repeated for credit.
PHY 595: Master's Degree Thesis
Research
Independent research for Master's degree
students. Open only to those approved by
individual faculty for thesis work. This course
also includes a minimum of two hours person
to person discussion of ethics and conduct
in research and scholarship which addresses
among others integrity in scholarship,
academic honesty, authorship, plagiarism,
mentoring and collaborations. These topics
will be illustrated with case studies and issues
that arise in current research projects.
1-18 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
PHY 598: Graduate Seminar I
Special research topics centered on
monographs, conference proceedings, or
journal articles. Topics include solid-state
physics, atomic physics, quantum optics and
applications of synchroton radiation. Required
for all first-year graduate students.
Fall and Spring, 0-1 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

PHY 599: Graduate Seminar II
Special research topics centered on
monographs, conference proceedings, or
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
journal articles. Topics include elementary
etc.)
particles, nuclear physics, galactic and
PHY 582: Optics Rotation
PHY 577: Physical and Mathematical
extragalactic astronomy, and cosmology and
Optical science students experience three
Foundations of Quantum Mechanics for to eight week periods in each of several
accelerator physics. Required for all first-year
Teachers
appropriate research groups. At the end of each graduate students.
Physical and mathematical foundations of
period a report is required that describes the
Fall and Spring, 0-1 credits, Letter graded (A,
quantum mechanics. Maxwell waves and
topics studied or project done. May not be
A-, B+, etc.)
their properties: intensity, energy density,
taken for credit more than two semesters.
May be repeated for credit.
and momentum density. Planck-Einstein
Fall and Spring, 0-2 credits, Letter graded (A,
PHY 600: Practicum in Teaching
relation between energy and frequency for
A-, B+, etc.)
light quanta. De Broglie relation between
This course provides hands-on experience in
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
momentum and wavelength. Number density
teaching. Activities may include classroom
and probability density of photons. OnePHY 584: Rotation in Physical Biology teaching, preparation and supervision of
photon quantum mechanics, with Maxwell
laboratory experiments, exams, homework
A two-semester course in which students
field as wave function. Diffraction phenomena. spend at least 8 weeks in each of three
assignments, and projects.
Uncertainty relation between wavelength
different laboratories actively participating
Fall and Spring, 0-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
and position, hence between momentum and
in the research of faculty associated with the
A-, B+, etc.)
position. In addition to the requirements for
Laufer Center. At least one of the rotations
May be repeated for credit.
the undergraduate course PHY 307, students
must be in experimental physical biology.
taking this course must prepare and present a
Participants will give a research talk at the end PHY 601: Group Theory for Physicists
talk on quantum physics suitable for a general of each eight week period.
This course provides an introduction to
(non-physics) adult audience. This course
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, group theory and discusses topics that are
cannot be taken for credit toward the PhD
important for applications in physics. Topics
A-, B+, etc.)
degrees in Physics. Approval of the Program
that will be discussed include but are not
May
be
repeated
for
credit.
Director is required for taking this course for
restricted to the following: finite groups,
credit toward a Master Degree.
Lie groups, Lie algebras, Clifford algebras,
PHY 585: Special Study
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) Reading course in selected topics.
Cartan generators, Dynkin diagrams, Young
tableaux, noncompact groups such as the
Fall and Spring, 1-18 credits, Letter graded
PHY 578: Quantum Physics for
Poincar\'e group, invariant measures and
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
Teachers
Fall and Spring, 1-18 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

192

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
coset manifolds. Additional topics such as
Kac-Moody algebras, Virasoro algebras,
symmetric spaces, supergroups and their
invariant measure may be discussed as well.
PS. The accent on the "e" of Poincare is and
acute accent denoted by\' Offered Fall or
Spring
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 604: Computational Methods in
Physics and Astrophysics II
This course discusses numerical methods
used in physics and astrophysics. Topics
include but are not limited to the following:
Numerical integration and differentiation,
differential equations, interpolation, rootfinding, linear algebra, eigenvalues, Fourier
transforms, Monte Carlo methods, hyperbolic
and parabolic partial differential equations,
parallel computing. All methods will be
illustrated by examples from physics or
astrophysics. Familiarity with Computational
Methods in Physics and Astrophysics (PHY
504) is assumed.
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 610: Quantum Field Theory I
Quantization of relativistic fields: Lorentz
and gauge symmetries, relativistic spin, the
S-matrix and scattering; the standard model;
perturbation theory, renormalization and
effective field theories; path integrals and
relations to condensed matter physics.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 611: Quantum Field Theory II
Quantization of relativistic fields: Lorentz
and gauge symmetries, relativistic spin, the
S-matrix and scattering; the standard model;
perturbation theory, renormalization and
effective field theories; path integrals and
relations to condensed matter physics.
Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
PHY 612: Theoretical Particle Physics
Applications of quantum field theory to
interactions between elementary particles.
Topics are chosen from perturbative quantum
chromodynamics, the standard electro-weak
model, lattice field theory, grand unified
models, supersymmetry, and current research
problems.
Fall, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
PHY 613: Advanced Particle Theory
This course is a continuation of PHY
612 and prepares students for research in
theoretical particle physics. Topics that will be
discussed include the properties of Quantum

Spring 2021
Chromodyanamics, Electorweak Symmetry
Breaking, Cabbibbo-Kobayahi-Maskawa
quark mixing, Effective Field theory, Neutrino
masses, the hierarchy problems, dark matter,
early universe cosmology and primordial
nucleosynthesis. Physics beyond the standard
model will be discussed as well including
models of quark and lepton masses, grand
unified theories and baryon number violation.
Semesters Offered: Spring and
Fall, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
PHY 620: Modern General Relativity
General theory of relativity; tensor analysis,
Einstein's field equations, experimental
tests, black holes, gravitational waves,
cosmology. May also include topics such as
spinor methods, conformal invariance, and
introduction to string theory or supergravity.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
PHY 621: Advanced Quantum Field
Theory
Proofs of renormalizability and unitarity on
non-Abelian guage theories using modern
methods of Becchi-Rouet-Store-Tyutin
(BRST) symmetry; descent equations for
anomalies; classical instantons and their
quantum corrections, including integration
over zero modes; background field methods,
other topics if time permits. PHY 610/611 or
equivalent is prerequisite.

bosonic & spinning strings and heterotic &
Green-Schwarz superstrings; conformal field
theory; tree-level and one-loop amplitudes;
partition functions; spacetime supersymmetry
and supergravity; compactification &
duality; winding & Kaluza-Klein modes;
11-dimensional supergravity; branes in
supergravity; D-branes in string theory; Tduality; M-theory; complex geometry and
Calabi-Yau manifolds; string field theory;
other advanced topics if time permits. PHY
610/611 or equivalent is prerequisite.
Fall or Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PHY 655: Advanced Graduate Seminar
in Theoretical Physics
A weekly seminar on advanced theoretical
concepts. The discussion starts with a graduate
student presentation and it is conducted under
the guidance of a faculty supervisor.
1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PHY 664: Astronomy Journal Club
Presentation of preliminary research results
and current research problems by students
and faculty. Required every semester of all
astronomy graduate students.
0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

PHY 665: Journal Club in
Computational Biology
Fall or Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
The goal of this course is for students to
A-, B+, etc.)
hone critical reading and analytic skills
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
through discussions of literature in the area
of Computational Biology. Participants
PHY 622: String Theory I
take turn being a "discussion leader" who
This course is intended for graduate students
informally guides the group through a peerwho have familiarity with guage & quantum
reviewed manuscript for which all Journal
field theory. Topics will be selected from: Free Club members will have to read in advance
bosonic & spinning strings and heterotic &
of the meeting. Meetings in the Spring
Green-Schwarz superstrings; conformal field
semester will include in Person Training
theory; tree-level and one-loop amplitudes;
(IPT) in Responsible conduct of Research and
partition functions; spacetime supersymmetry Scholarship (RCRS) on topics that comprise
and supergravity; compactification &
(1) Integrity in Scholarship, (2) Scientific
duality; winding & Kaluza-Klein modes;
Misconduct, (3) Mentoring, (4) Ownership
11-dimensional supergravity; branes in
and Authorship, (5) Plagiarism, (6) Data
supergravity; D-branes in string theory; TManagement, (7) Journalism and Science, (8)
duality; M-theory; complex geometry and
Human Subjects, and (9) Laboratory Animals.
Calabi-Yau manifolds; string field theory;
0-1 credits, S/U grading
other advanced topics if time permits. PHY
May be repeated for credit.
610/611 or equivalent is prerequisite.
PHY 666: Cool Stars
Fall or Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
A weekly seminar concentrating on
observational and theoretical studies of cool
PHY 623: String Theory II
stars and related objects. Emphasis is on
This course is intended for graduate students
ongoing research and recent results in this
who have familiarity with guage & quantum
area. Speakers include faculty, students,
field theory. Topics will be selected from: free and visitors. Topics anticipated in the near

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

193

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

future include results from the Hubble Space
Telescope and ROSAT. Students registering
for one credit will be expected to present at
least one seminar.

May be repeated for credit.

Fall and Spring, 0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

PHY 668: Seminar in Astronomy
A weekly series of research seminars presented
by visiting scientists as well as by the faculty.
Required every semester of all astronomy
graduate students.
Fall and Spring, 0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

PHY 681: Special Topics in Statistical
Mechanics

PHY 682: Special Topics in Solid-State
Physics
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
PHY 683: Special Topics in Astronomy

PHY 669: Nuclear Astrophysics
Seminar
A weekly seminar concentrating on topics in
nuclear astrophysics, including dynamics of
supernova collapse, structure and evolution
of neutron stars, equation of state, the role of
neutrinos in nucleosynthesis, etc.

Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
PHY 684: Special Topics in Nuclear
Physics

0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

PHY 670: Seminar in Theoretical
Physics

PHY 685: Special Topics in
Mathematical Physics

Fall and Spring, 0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PHY 672: Seminar in Elementary
Particle Physics
Fall and Spring, 0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PHY 673: Seminar in Cosmology
This seminar discusses current topics in
cosmology. Each semester consists of a formal
talk followed by an informal discussion of
active areas of cosmology research.
Fall and Spring, 0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PHY 674: Seminar in Nuclear Physics
Fall and Spring, 0-1 credits, S/U grading
PHY 676: Seminar in Solid-State
Physics
Fall and Spring, 0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PHY 678: Atomic, Molecular and
Optical Physics Seminar
Fall and Spring, 0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PHY 680: Special Topics in Theoretical
Physics
Fall and Spring
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

physics will increase significantly and there
will be much more demand for courses in
this area. For a long time accelerator physics
courses have been taught as "PHY 584:
Special Topics in Nuclear Physics", but this
is improper use of the course listing. The
purpose of this course is two-fold. First, it
is a special topic course that is taught full
time at Stony Brook. Second, it is special
topics course which is taught in collaboration
with the United States Particle Accelerator
School (USPAS), which is taught on a rotating
basis at various universities and National
Laboratories in the US. If that is the case,
students will prepare for the USPAS course
during the semester, and will particioate in
the USPAS school in the following Winter
or Summer break. The grade for the course
will be determined by the grade in the USPAS
school. Funding to participate in the USPAS
course will be provided by USPAS if students
are registered for such course at their local
university.
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

PHY 689: Special Topics in Accelerator
Physics
Recently we established the Center for
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, Accelerator Physics with Vladimir Litvinenko
appointed as Director (with a shared
A-, B+, etc.)
appointment at BNL), and with a second
May be repeated for credit.
faculty position in accelerator physics being
PHY 686: Special Topics in Elementary added in the near future, we expect that the
number of students working on accelerator
Particles
physics will increase significantly and there
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
will be much more demand for courses in
A-, B+, etc.)
this area. For a long time accelerator physics
May be repeated for credit.
courses have been taught as "PHY 584:
PHY 687: Topics in Biological Physics Special Topics in Nuclear Physics", but this
is improper use of the course listing. The
The "Topics" courses in the 680 sequence do
purpose of this course is two-fold. First, it
not have specific description, since the subject is a special topic course that is taught full
matter within the broadly defined topic may
time at Stony Brook. Second, it is special
change from one semester to the next.
topics course which is taught in collaboration
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
with the United States Particle Accelerator
May be repeated for credit.
School (USPAS), which is taught on a rotating
basis at various universities and National
PHY 688: Special Topics in
Laboratories in the US. If that is the case,
Astrophysics
students will prepare for the USPAS course
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, during the semester, and will particioate in
the USPAS school in the following Winter
A-, B+, etc.)
or Summer break. The grade for the course
May be repeated for credit.
will be determined by the grade in the USPAS
PHY 689: Special Topics in Accelerator school. Funding to participate in the USPAS
Physics
course will be provided by USPAS if students
are registered for such course at their local
Recently we established the Center for
Accelerator Physics with Vladimir Litvinenko university.
appointed as Director (with a shared
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
appointment at BNL), and with a second
PHY 690: Special Topics in Atomic and
faculty position in accelerator physics being
Optical Physics
added in the near future, we expect that the
number of students working on accelerator

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

194

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
PHY 691: Computational Accelerator
Physics
The course prepares graduate students in
a comprehensive and systematic way for
applying numerical methods to solve problems
for which analytical methods have limitations.
This knowledge will be applied to producing,
collecting, analyzing and understanding
numerical simulation data, and presenting and
reporting results using appropriate media. This
course will allow students to attain the level
of knowledge needed to thrive in the field of
particle accelerators, including cyclotrons,
synchrotrons, storage rings, linear accelerators,
colliders and industrial accelerators.
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PHY 698: Colloquium
Fall and Spring, 0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PHY 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Independent research for Ph.D. degree
candidates. Open only to students who have
advanced to candidacy (G5). Major portion
of research must take place on SBU campus,
at Cold Spring Harbor, or at the Brookhaven
National Lab. This course also includes a
minimum of two hours person to person
discussion of ethics and conduct in research
and scholarship which addresses among
others integrity in scholarship, academic
honesty, authorship, plagiarism, mentoring and
collaborations. These topics will be illustrated
with case studies and issues that arise in
current research projects.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.
PHY 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Independent research for Ph.D. degree
candidates. Open only to students who have
advanced to candidacy (G5). Major portion
of research will take place off-campus, but
in the United States and/or U.S. provinces.
Please note, Brookhaven National Labs and
the Cold Spring Harbor Lab are considered oncampus. This course also includes a minimum
of two hours person to person discussion of
ethics and conduct in research and scholarship
which addresses among others integrity in
scholarship, academic honesty, authorship,
plagiarism, mentoring and collaborations.
These topics will be illustrated with case
studies and issues that arise in current research

Spring 2021
projects. All international students must enroll
in one of the graduate student insurance plans
and should be advised by an International
Advisor.
1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PHY 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Independent research for Ph.D. degree
candidates. Open only to students who have
advanced to candidacy (G5). Major portion
of research will take place outside of the
United States and/or U.S. provinces. Domestic
students have the option of the health plan
and may also enroll in MEDEX. International
students who are in their home country are not
covered by mandatory health plan and must
contact the Insurance Office for the insurance
charge to be removed. International students
who are not in their home country are charged
for the mandatory health insurance. If they
are to covered by another insurance plan they
must file a waiver before the second week of
classes. The charge will only be removed if
other plan is deemed comparable. This course
also includes a minimum of two hours person
to person discussion of ethics and conduct
in research and scholarship which addresses
among others integrity in scholarship,
academic honesty, authorship, plagiarism,
mentoring and collaborations. These topics
will be illustrated with case studies and issues
that arise in current research projects. All
international students must receive clearance
from an International Advisor.
1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PHY 800: SUMMER RESEARCH
May be repeated for credit.

POL
Political Science
POL 501: Introductory Statistics
This course acquaints student with statistics.
It begins with the basics of applied statistical
analysis, including probability and hypothesis
testing, and builds to simple regression
analysis. Requires use of computer packages.
Prerequisites: Some elementary mathematics/
statistics background helpful
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 502: Intermediate Statistics
This course utilizes multivariate regression
analysis and explores violations of the linear
model. Requires use of computer.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 503: Survey Research Methods
This course studies the techniques of
survey research and their application in the
development of public policies. Topics include
survey design, survey population sampling,
use of survey data to frame policy choices and
attitudes towards existing policies.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 504: Research Design
This course will cover a variety of research
methods that can be used to study attitudes and
opinions: Experimental methods (in laboratory
and field settings), quasi-experimental designs,
surveys and questionnaires, and methods for
studying various psychological characteristics
of attitudes such as reaction time and lexical
decision tasks. 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 506: Big Data & Visualization
The goal of the course is to apply state-ofthe-art techniques to analyze social problems
using and combining large quantities of data
from a variety of different sources. The course
also emphasizes communicating through the
visual presentation of data. Students may be
asked to critique existing work and to practice
creating visualizations of their own with data
visualization software and programs. 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 508: Public Policy Experiments
Randomized experimental interventions-in
the field and elsewhere-are increasingly being
conducted to learn about the effects of public
policies on a wide range of issues such as
education and health care. This course reviews
experimental procedures and protocols,
lessons from past policy experiments, and
ethical considerations. Students may also be
asked to critique existing studies as well as
to apply course concepts to policies. Natural
experiments and quasi-experiments may also
be examined during the course.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 509: Public Budgeting and
Finance
This course develops the rationale for public
taxation and spending programs. It examines
the role of public finance in the economy, and
explores the use of program and functional
budgets, capital and operating budgets,
intergovernmental expenditures, etc. Focuses
on state and local governments (Fall) or
National and International Finance (Spring).
195

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
POL 510: Personnel Systems for
Public Policy
his course examines the development of civil
service and other bureaucratic personnel
systems in American government. It focuses
on the knowledge that managers must have
to utilize human resources appropriately in
the constrained public sector environment.
Focuses mainly on state and local government.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 513: Intergovernmental Relations
& Policy Delivery
The examination of the formulation,
implementation, and impact of
intergovernmental policy are the core concepts
to be covered in this course. Several policies
are likely to be examined in-depth, such as
grant-in-aid programs, General Revenue
Sharing, housing and community development,
and employment programs. The historical,
economic, and political foundations of
intergovernmental policy delivery systems
may also be examined.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 514: Personnel Systems &
Bureaucracies
This course examines the development of
civil service and other bureaucratic personnel
systems in American government. It focuses
on the knowledge that managers must have
to utilize human resources appropriately in
the constrained public sector environment.
The focus of this course will be on state and
local government, but federal agencies may
also be considered to provide a comparative
perspective.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 515: Health Economics
The course provides an overview of general
economic principles, an understanding of how
markets function, and why markets fail in
order to understand the effects of economic
principles on health care and the effect of
health policy and economic forces on the
health care delivery system. Students will be
taught to use economic concepts to analyze
health policy in its ability to improve the
delivery of health care services.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 516: Storms & Seas: Coastal Land
Management
Many areas of the world, like Long Island,
are surrounded by water and are vulnerable
to increasing weather -related threats and

Spring 2021
sea-level rise. This course dives into the
challenges related to public policy design
and implementation as climate changes
force planners to consider novel solutions to
increasingly complex situations.

policies, their effects, and future directions.
Special consideration will be devoted to recent
issues as well as housing issues affecting the
New York metropolitan area.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 518: Law & Public Policy
Public policies are often written in the form of
legal statutes and laws. This course considers
the role of the law in public policy from a
domestic perspective. Topics include various
forms of discrimination as well as contracts
and historical precedent.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 519: State & Local Politics
States are frequently described as "
laboratories of democracy" because there is
great variation in the policies and practices of
state governments across the United States.
This course examines political institutions,
actors, and issues within American state and
local governments. Among other topics, the
class will discuss federalism, political culture,
state campaigns and elections, political parties,
constitutional provisions, and government
branches (legislative, executive, and judicial).
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 520: Applied Economics & Public
Policy
Public policies are often created to address
private market failures or imbalances. This
course focuses attention on how economic
concepts manifest in public policy planning,
delivery, and outcomes.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 521: Behavioral Economics &
Public Policy
People often behave in ways that deviate from
classical economic theories. This course helps
students learn about these deviations and to
construct public policies around such empirical
regularities.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 522: Economic Issues & Public
Policy
Many public policies have their roots in
economic decisions or outcomes. This course
considers recurring and important aspects of
the economy in relation to public policy.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 524: Housing Policy
Where and how people live is one of the most
basic and important considerations when it
comes to government planning and action.
This course explores the evolution of housing

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

POL 530: Topics in Public Affairs
Specially organized seminars are offered on
topics of particular importance to students
of public affairs. These courses are led by
distinguished experts in those policy areas.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
POL 531: Topics in Public Affairs:
Planning
This course addresses the planning
process as a decision-making tool in the
implementation of public policy in housing,
land-use, transportation, and environmental
management. The course also investigates
intergovernmental relations and the impact of
citizen participation on policy changes.
Offered in Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
POL 532: Moral Politics & Public Policy
Many public policy issues are moral issues,
such as capital punishment, same-sex
marriage, gun control, public health care,
affordable housing, and progressive taxation.
This class examines how moral judgment
differs from judgments based on self-interest,
economics, or altruism. It also examines how
moral condemnation affects policy debates and
how moral accusations clash with arguments
based on non-moral considerations such as
economics, group loyalty, or authority.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 534: Intergovernmental Relations
and Policy Delivery
The examination of the formulation,
implementation, and impact of
intergovernmental policy are the core concepts
to be covered in this course. Several policies
are examined in-depth, including grant-in-aid
programs, General Revenue Sharing, housing
and community development, and employment
programs. The historical, economic, and
political foundations of intergovernmental
policy delivery systems are examined.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 535: Public Policy Analysis and
Evaluation
This course concentrates on the strategies
and methods of public policy analysis and
evaluation. Students debate the merits of
proposed solutions to various policy issues
196

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
and discover the political constraints on the
policy making process. Skills stressed in the
course include cost-benefit analysis, program
evaluation, and basic microeconomics.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 536: Public Management and
Organizational Behavior
This course examines how public sector
organizations work and how managers can
operate in the public sector environment. A
range of theoretical perspectives, including
sociological, economic, and institutional,
will be employed as real public organizations
are examined and analyzed. Public agencies
will also be compared to their private sector
counterparts, and the nature of organizational
efficiency will be explored.

Spring 2021
POL 541: Politics of Local Economic
Development
This course examines the process of local
economic development with an emphasis
on the interaction of political and economic
factors. It explores the extent to which local
(as compared to state and federal) officials
can influence business location decisions, the
specific strategies often utilized, and the way
they have changed over time. It also considers
the winners and losers from the "economic
development game" with a focus on New York
and Long Island.

POL 546: Comparative Public Policy &
Politics
Comparative studies of politics seek to identify
and understand the similarities and differences
among political systems by breaking broad
topics down into the factors found in
individual countries. Possible questions
to be addressed are: Are certain forms of
representative democracy more effective than
others? Why are some countries prosperous,
and others poor? How does authoritarian
control affect economic development?
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

POL 542: Regional Planning
This course addresses the planning
process as a decision-making tool in the
implementation of public policy in housing,
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
land-use, transportation, and environmental
etc.)
management. The course also investigates
POL 537: Administrative Law for Policy intergovernmental relations and the impact of
Analysts
citizen participation on policy changes.
This course examines the role of
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
administrative law in the formulation,
implementation and evaluation of public
POL 543: Environmental Politics and
policy. The role of legislation such as the
Policy
Administrative Procedures Act is explored.
Federal environmental policies, such as
Actual cases are analyzed, as well as the
the National Environmental Policy Act,
broader set of precedents that have emerged
the Coastal Zone Management Act, and
in federal, state, and local administrative law
the Federal Pure Waters Management Act
proceedings.
are examined in this course. The policies,
politics and administrative activities of
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
federal, state, and local levels are considered.
POL 538: The Politics of Local
Finally, the interaction of the public sector,
Economic Development
the private sector, and citizen groups in the
implementation of environmental policy is
This course examines the process of local
discussed. This course is offered as both CES
economic development with an emphasis
553 and POL 543.
on the interaction of political and economic
factors. It explores the extent to which local
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
(as compared to state and federal) officials
May be repeated for credit.
can influence business location decisions, the
specific strategies often utilized, and the way
POL 544: Human Behavior as Rational
they have changed over time. It also considers Action
the winners and losers from the "economic
Rational behavior means choosing among
development game" with a focus on New York possible actions those that are most efficient
and Long Island.
in meeting one's goals. Whether people do
so is one of the oldest unresolved disputes
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
in philosophy and the social sciences. We
POL 540: Data Applications in Public
will trace the main positions in this dispute as
Policy
they have evolved in philosophy, psychology,
economics, anthropology and sociology.
This course studies the strategic use of data
Even if individuals do act rationally, can we
to support public policy proposal design
assume that the large scale social patterns that
and implementation. With a focus on U.S.
domestic policy, the class will gain proficiency result are necessarily effective? Readings will
consider the topic abstractly, but also in the
in the application of data to identify policy
problems, determine causative factors, develop concrete settings of small intimate groups,
formal organizations, and primitive and
and implement persuasive policy proposals,
modern economic, social and political systems
and evaluate the policy effectiveness.
in both stable and revolutionary situations.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

POL 553: Foundations: Comparative,
International
Survey and evaluation of the major
theoretical approaches, issues, and problems
in comparative political analysis. The
course examines such areas as political
development, empirical democratic theory, or
political socialization, along with a detailed
examination of one or more selected nonAmerican political systems.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 560: American Democracy: Its
Critics and Defenders
This course will examine the central
components of American democratic
government. Critics and defenders of the
over 200 year-old Constitution (Congress,
President, Supreme Court) will be discussed,
as will arguments surrounding the role of
political parties, pressure groups, and the
bureaucracy. Most readings will be from
contemporary authors and reference sources.
This course is offered as both CEI 560 and
POL 560.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 561: Dynamics of Public Opinion
This course provides an overview of the
literature on public opinion. The course will
start by considering the micro-foundations
of opinions and the psychology of opinion
holding. How much do people know about
politics and other aspects of the social world?
What are the consequences of differences in
knowledge and attitude strength? Building
from there, we will discuss the structure
of attitudes and opinions, specifically, the
nature of political ideology. A number of
determinants of opinions will be discussed
including values and personality. Finally,
the course will examine the dynamics of
attitudes and opinions and their relationship
to government policy and larger social trends.
Offered
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
197

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
POL 562: Passionate Politics:
Mobilization, Interest Groups, and
Social Movements
This course discusses political mobilization:
the factors that motivate political involvement
and the consequences that high levels of
public engagement have on elections and the
development of public policy. The course
begins with several high profile examples of
citizen engagement that have had noticeable
impact on American politics. This first section
also includes a discussion of the various ways
in which Americans can be mobilized from
involvement in election campaigns to the
distribution of political information via social
networks. The course then shifts focus to
cover the psychology of political mobilization
in detail, including the importance of group
memberships and identities, emotions, and
values. An entire unit of the course is devoted
to psychology of group membership in which
the mobilizing power of identities and the
role of politically motivating emotions are
discussed at length. Finally the last section of
the course is devoted to specific examples of
political mobilization in the U.S. including the
environment/green movement, issue groups
such as the right-to-life movement, racial
politics, and highly polarized partisan politics.
Overall, the course is designed to illuminate
the psychology of political mobilization
and apply these principles to contemporary
American politics.
Offered
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
POL 563: Thinking and Emotion in
Public Opinion
This course reviews recent research in
cognitive, social, and political psychology on
the interplay between cognition and emotion
in explaining social and political behavior.
Traditionally, political science has viewed
thinking as a conscious cognitive process
of intentional deliberation. Emotions and
other feelings have been ignored or seen as
interfering with rational though. Moreover,
until recently there has been almost no
consideration of what psychologists call
implicit or unconscious thought processes in
understanding public opinion. Psychologists
and communications researchers now
understand that implicit events and processes
(e.g., symbol or music cues in political
advertising) can have profound effects on
how citizens evaluate political candidates,
groups, and issues. We will examine the
traditional approach to political cognition and
consider how this recent research may alter
our understanding of the formation of public
opinion.

Spring 2021
Offered
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
POL 564: Social Influences
In studying public opinion, people often focus
on the arguments, information, and overt
attempts to persuade. In doing so, we neglect
the impact of the social environment in which
an individual is situated. Friends, family, and
aspects of the broader social environment all
deeply influence the attitudes people hold,
the tenacity with which they hold them, and
the political behaviors they engage in. Rather
than focusing on direct persuasion, this course
emphasizes the effect social context can have
upon people's opinions even without overt
argumentation or even information exchange.
Students will learn about the influence of 1)
other individuals (e.g. socialization, social
network influence), 2) social roles (e.g.
power, obedience) 3) societal influence (e.g.
normative influence, conformity, deviance
& rejection), and 4) influence from other
environmental sources (e.g. priming).
Offered
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
POL 565: Persuasion and Propaganda
Politics at its core is about persuasion. It
is about argumentation and debate, and
about bringing citizens to a particular way
of thinking about an issue, candidacy, or
event. Given its centrality in the political
process, understanding the dynamics of
political persuasion should be a high priority
for the discipline. In a more theoretical vein,
the concept of "attitude" is among the most
indispensable in the social sciences. This
course is intended to provide a survey of
contemporary theory and research on attitude
formation and change. It is not intended to
be a general course on the mass media, but
rather is concerned only with mass media
research as it pertains to individual-level
political attitude processes. The course is
divided into the following three sections: (1)
A consideration of basic concepts (e.g., what
is an "attitude"), methodological challenge,
and recent developments (e.g., the distinction
between implicit and explicit attitudes); (2)
An overview of major psychological theories
of persuasion that attempt to answer Harold
Lasswell's classic question: Who says what, in
which channel, to whom, and with what effect?
(3) An examination of the major agents of
political persuasion - the mass media, political
elites, social context, and interpersonal
processes.
Offered

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
POL 566: The Psychology of Voting
The course examines the key motivations,
attitudes, perceptions, and beliefs that guide
voters in the process of making up their minds
in choosing candidates in elections, including
the decision to turn out at all in elections.
The list of topics includes party identification
(acquisition, genetic basis, development over
the life cycle, and historic change); opinions
about policy issues and the conceptualization
of politics in ideological terms; the impact
of valence issues (the economy and national
security); perceptions of candidates (personal
as well as political qualities); group influence
on individual decisions, particularly racial
attitudes; and the impact of the campaign
(media ads, debates etc.) on vote choices.
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
POL 567: Culture, Values, and Public
Opinion
This course investigates the evolution of
values, cleavages, political space, and
issues in cross-national perspective (with
particular focus on the advanced industrialized
countries of the US, Europe, Israel, Japan,
and Australia). We begin our study with
the analysis of traditional socio-economic
cleavages in determining issue positions,
and the `end of ideology¿ theses propounded
by comparative political scientists, such as
Daniel Bell and Francois Fukuyama, and
elaborated by scholars of the behavioral
revolution such as Inglehart, Dalton, and
Franklin. We then explore the strengths and
weaknesses of paradigm shifts to values,
buttressed by public opinion data. Bringing in
cultural and neo-institutional explanations of
political behavior and change, the course weds
individual level analysis and group behavior
theories with rigorous empirical testing. We
will look at cross-national and longitudinal
data sets to examine the evolving political
space stemming from new politics, identity
politics, immigration, and "new security"
threats in a global era. Finally, the course will
conclude by looking at how different levels of
analyses (individual, group, and institutions)
contribute to explain contentious politics,
`boundary-making ("us" and "them"), and the
`politics of difference across cultures.
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
POL 568: Master's Thesis
This course entails a student thesis paper under
supervision of a faculty member on a research

198

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
project related to methods used to study the
dynamics of public opinion.
1-6 credits,
POL 569: Internship in MA in Political
Science
The internship for the Political Science M.A.
is designed to provide first-hand experience
with the major research methods used to study
the dynamics of public opinion. The student
is expected to work in the organization and
prepare a daily journal of activities, as well as
paper at the conclusion of the course, apply
program knowledge to the internship activities.
Permission of Program Director is required.
1-6 credits,
POL 571: Moral Politics
Many political issues ranging from capital
punishment to same-sex marriage to wealth
redistribution are moral issues. This course
will use moral psychology to better understand
public opinion, political debates, and political
behavior. We will examine how moral
judgement differs from judgments based on
self interest and altruism. We will address
the role of moral condemnation in political
debates and how moral accusations clash with
arguments based on non-moral considerations
such as economics, group loyalty, or authority.
Topics include alternative moral frames,
liberal-conservative differences, moral
metaphors, and moral emotions. We will apply
these concepts to understand public opinion
about political issues surrounding property,
fairness, sexuality, religion, and violence.
Semesters offered- Fall and Spring Must be a
student in POLMA program
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 572: Human Behavior as Rational
Action
Rational behavior means choosing among
possible actions those that are most efficient
in meeting one's goals. Whether people do
so is one of the oldest unresolved disputes
in philosophy and the social sciences. We
will trace the main positions in this dispute as
they have evolved in philosophy, psychology,
economics, anthropology and sociology.
Even if individuals do act rationally, can we
assume that the large scale social patterns that
result are necessarily effective? Readings will
consider the topic abstractly, but also in the
concrete settings of small intimate groups,
formal organizations, and primitive and
modern economic, social and political systems
in both stable and revolutionary situations.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 590: Public Policy Internship

Spring 2021
Prerequisite: Permission of GPD
3-6 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
POL 591: Directed Policy Research
Prerequisite: Permission of GPD Student
works under supervision of faculty member on
research project related to public policy.
1-6 credits, S/U grading
POL 596: Capstone Preparation
Seminar
This course introduces students to the various
paths students may take to complete the M.A.
in Public Policy (MAPP) program. Except in
rare circumstances, it will be taught as a zerocredit, online course.

student projects that analyze the political
economy of a governmental policy.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 602: Applied Data Analysis I
The application of statistical and mathematical
models to the analysis of political data:
introduction to the research process and to
topics in measurement, basic descriptive
statistics, and inferential statistics.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 603: Applied Data Analysis II
The application of statistical and mathematical
models to the analysis of political data:
regression analysis.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

0-6 credits, S/U grading
POL 597: Capstone Internship in
Public Policy
This course is an applied internship in a public,
not-for-profit, or private sector organization
that deals with public policy. The student
works in the organization and prepares a daily
journal of activities, as well as a paper at the
conclusion of the course, applying program
knowledge to the internship activities.
1-6 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
POL 598: Capstone Thesis Project in
Public Policy
This course is primarily for students already
employed in related field. In lieu of internship,
student completes a Master's project which
goes beyond their normal employment duties
to apply theory and methods to a particular
policy issue.
6 credits,
POL 600: Research Project
A two-semester introduction to research for
first-year students. The course introduces
issues of research design through lectures and
presentations of current research by faculty
members. Each student designs his or her
own research paper under the guidance of a
faculty member familiar with his or her area of
interest. Final papers are due in the beginning
of May.
0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
POL 601: Foundations: Public Policy
and Political Economy
A systematic introduction to the principles of
political economy. Develops a microeconomic
model and approach to public policy analysis.
A major part of the course is devoted to

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

POL 604: Applied Data Analysis III
The application of statistical methods to the
analysis of political data. The emphasis is
on diagnosing and dealing with violations
of assumptions of statistical models. Topics
covered include advanced regression, models
for discrete dependent variables, systems of
equations, and selection bias.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 605: Foundations: American
Politics
A review of the basic political science
literature on American politics, with emphasis
on American political institutions.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 606: Time Series Analysis
This seminar will consider statistical models
for political processes observed over time.
The major topics will include conintegration,
time varying parameter models and duration
models.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 607: Social Survey in
Contemporary Society
This course on political socialization focuses
on continuity and change in political attitudes
and behavior across the life span. Topics
include the stability of political attitudescontrasting the greater durability of political
partisanship and basic values with the
relative instability of issue positions; the
social psychology of attitude change, which
lends some insight into the conditions under
which attitudes are most likely to change;
the importance of political period or era as a
determinant of political attitudes and behavior;
and the existence and coherence of distinct
political generations. Some attention is also
given to the political changes that accompany
old age, including changes in attitude and
199

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
behavior linked to growing dependency on the
Social Security and Medicare systems.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring 2021
A seminar on the legislative process, focusing
on current research on the United States
Congress.

about particular policy areas (e.g., pork barrel
politics).
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 608: Foundations: Political
Psychology, Behavior
A review and analysis of the political behavior
literature, including such topics as attitude
formation and change, belief systems, political
socialization, demographic and small group
influences on political beliefs and conduct,
political leadership, electoral behavior, elite vs.
mass politics, decision making, personality and
politics, political conformity, and protest.

POL 616: Political Parties and Groups
A seminar on parties, campaigns, and elections
in the United States. Topics covered include
party organization and leadership, nomination
and general election campaigns, and the role of
parties in government.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

POL 609: Advanced Research Design
A practical application of topics in the
philosophy of science to research design.
Students prepare their dissertation proposal as
a part of this course.

POL 617: Electoral Behavior
Models of voting choices; key attitudes such
as party identification, issue orientations, and
ideology; the impact of group affiliations,
economic conditions; campaign strategies
of candidates; congressional vs. presidential
elections; historical change, e.g., party
realignments.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

POL 610: Foundations II: Experimental
Design and Methods
An overview of experimental research with
an emphasis on experimental design, data
analysis, and interpretation. Students develop
the ability to critically evaluate experimental
research. Students also participate in the
development, implementation, and analysis of
a laboratory experiment.

POL 618: American Political Ideology
This course examines American political
ideology as it is reflected in public opinion,
political debate, and public policy. The goal is
to understand the underlying bases of conflict
and consensus in American politics and the
ways in which they influence and constrain
debate over public policy. The course traces
the development of political conflict in the
United States and examines the basis of
contemporary political debate.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 613: Game Theory for Political
Science
Introduction to formal models of strategic
behavior in static, dynamic, and repeated
games. Technical emphasis is formulation and
solution of games of complete and incomplete
information; a variety of equilibrium concepts
will be introduced. Substantive applications
include spatial models of candidate behavior
in elections; agenda control and bargaining
in legislatures; lobbying by interest groups;
common pool resource problems; and
cooperation between rivals.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 614: American Judiciary
A seminar on judicial process and behavior.
Emphasis is placed on the Supreme Court,
but trial courts and other appellate courts
are examined as well. Topics include
constitutional interpretation and both legal
and extra-legal models of decision making.
Students should possess basic methodological
skills.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 615: Legislative Process

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 620: Government Regulation of
Business
An examination of the scope of government
regulation of business in the United States
today-regulation at both the federal and
state levels and by both economic and social
agencies. The course compares market
vs. regulatory policies as well as possible
explanations for why some regulatory
agencies change over time. Finally, the course
considers proposed reforms, such as clearer
legislative standards, curbs on "revolving
door" practices, greater citizen participation in
agency proceedings, and deregulation.

POL 622: Bureaucracy and the Policy
Process
An examination of bureaucracy as part of the
policy-making process. This course reviews
theoretical explanations for the bureaucracy
as a political institution and implications of its
rapid growth since the New Deal. It also looks
inside bureaucratic organizations, examining
factors that influence the exercise of discretion
and policy implementation.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 625: Ecological Rationality
Students will learn about the major theories of
ecological rationality and how they compare
to classical conceptions of rationality and
to bounded rationality. Students will learn
how this approach has influenced research in
political science, psychology, and economics.
Course topics will include: theoretical
foundations of ecological rationality, political
decision making as a manifestation of
ecological rationality, application to heuristics,
the relationship between ecological rationality
and prospect theory, applications to risktaking, applications to behavioral economics,
applications to trust and cooperation. At its
core, ecological rationality is a vision of
human psychology. Thus, this course provides
a foundational perspective for our students
who are emphasizing political psychology in
their studies. The nature of human rationality
is also a core topic in behavioral economics
and political economy. Thus, this course is also
foundational for students emphasizing BPE.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

POL 626: Social Networks
The course is designed to introduce students
to the process of analyzing interdependent
political actors. We will ultimately discuss
using whole network data to conduct social
network analysis'note, these networks need not
be social; they could be international networks
of countries, for example. It is important to
realize, however, that whole network data
is often not available and, further, it is very
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
difficult to collect. We begin, therefore, by
considering methods that take account of the
POL 621: Theories of Policy Making
interdependence of political actors without
An introduction to theories of policy making,
analyzing the entire network within which
especially policy formulation, stressing reading those actors operate. The different methods
and thinking about classics and acquiring
and measures we discuss in this class could be
skills necessary for theorizing, including
incorporated into almost all areas of political
mathematical modeling and formal theory.
science. Thus, the ultimate goal of this class is
Laboratories focus on improving special
to give students and a lexicon and a toolkit to
skills (e.g., optimization) and theorizing
use in their own research.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

200

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 627: Legislative Behavior
This course provides an overview of the
theoretical and empirical studies of legislative
politics. The course will place a particular
emphasis on rational choice institutional
perspectives. Briefly, this paradigm suggests
that individual-level strategic calculations
are paramount in understanding political
phenomena, and institutions both emerge
from and serve to constrain these rational,
utility maximizing political actors. While
the main focus of the course is the U.S.
Congress, much of what we cover will have
direct relevance to the study of legislatures
more generally (both cross-nationally
and American state legislatures). We will
discuss congressional elections, the nature of
congressional representation, positive theories
of congressional organization, political parties,
the committee system, institutional change,
bicameralism, inter-branch relations, and
comparative legislatures.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 629: Experimental Game Theory
Surveys experimental tests of formal models
derived from political economy and game
theory, and applies behavioral and socialpsychological theories to explain deviations
from equilibrium behavior. The methodologies
of psychological and economic experiments
are contrasted and explored. Substantive
applications include social trust, bargaining
power, agenda control, committee decision
making, common pool resource problems, and
political persuasion.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 631: Political Cognition
Surveys the contemporary psychological
literature on human memory and cognition,
with emphasis on applications to political
information processing.

Spring 2021
making, with emphasis on applications
to decision making in politics. Special
focus on small-group methods and research
applications.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 633: Social Influence and Group
Processes in Political Decision Making
Review of contemporary theories of social
influence processes and group decision

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 634: Behavioral Decision Theory
Emphasizes psychological theories of
judgment and choice and prediction of the
errors that individual decision makers are
likely to make. These ideas are applied to a
variety of political contexts.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 664: Advanced Institutions
POL 670: Advanced Topics: Political
Economy I
An intensive examination of major substantive
and methodological concerns involved in the
study of political economy.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
POL 671: Advanced Topics: Political
Economy II
Reading and research in the area of political
economy.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 673: Advanced Topics: American
Politics I
A seminar in American institutions and
processes, focusing on current research in such
areas as Congress, the Supreme Court, the
presidency, political parties, or bureaucracy.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
POL 674: Advanced Topics: American
Politics II
A continuation of POL 673.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 632: Mass Communication and
Political Persuasion
In-depth examination of the role of mass media
in the political process and the psychological
dynamics of media influence. Effects of
the media on public opinion and voting.
Implications of media influence on democratic
theory.

an opportunity to apply advanced research
tools to selected substantive problems.

POL 675: Advanced Topics:
Comparative Politics I
Readings and research papers on topics in
comparative politics. Particular attention is
given to concepts and methods identified with
the field.

POL 678: Political Decision Making
Review of the literature and methods related
to a topic or problem in contemporary
political science, voting behavior, issue
formation, interest groups, political economy,
or personality.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
POL 679: Advanced Topics: Political
Psychology/Behavior I
Reading and research in the area of political
psychology and behavior.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 680: Directed Study
Individual studies under the guidance of
a faculty member. Subject matter varies
according to the needs of the student.
1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
POL 681: Directed Study
Individual studies under the guidance of
a faculty member. Subject matter varies
according to the needs of the student.
1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
POL 690: Research Colloquium
Students participate in weekly departmental
colloquia where they serve as discussants
of research reports presented by individual
faculty members or outside investigators
reporting on current research.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POL 691: Research Practicum I
A course actively involving students in an
ongoing research project under the direction
of a principal investigator. Students participate
in all stages of the research project and are
required to prepare a research report on one
aspect of the project.
3 credits, S/U grading

POL 692: Research Practicum II
A continuation of POL 691. Students actively
participate in either a second research project,
POL 676: Advanced Topics: Methods I where they will again prepare a research
report, or continue their participation in the
A course reviewing the literature and
same project, where they are then assigned
methodology of specific areas of political
science research. The course relates directly to a subset of data for analysis or carry out a
research applications and provide students with specific research aim of the project.
3 credits, S/U grading
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

201

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

POL 693: Practicum in Teaching

POR 500: Reading Portuguese
Systematic instruction in the fundamentals
of reading comprehension and in specialized
subject-oriented vocabulary.

POL 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Dissertation research under direction of
advisor.

Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)

May be repeated for credit.

Prerequisite: Advancement to candidacy (G5);
permission of graduate program director.
Major portion of research must take place on
SBU campus, at Cold Spring Harbor, or at the
Brookhaven National Lab.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.
POL 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
POL 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
in MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.
All international students must received
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
POL 800: Summer Research
May be repeated for credit.

POR
Portuguese

POR 511: Portuguese for Spanish
Speaker
A one semester accelerated course in Brazilian
Portuguese for students with a native of nearnative command of Spanish. This course uses
Spanish as a base for study of Portuguese
grammar, vocabulary and pronunciation.
By the end of the semester students will be
prepared to read advanced materials and will
have acquired a basic proficiency in speaking,
writing and comprehension of standard
Brazilian Portuguese. A grade of B- or above
will satisfy the graduate language proficiency
requirement in Portuguese for the MA or PhD.
Department consent is required for enrollment.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
POR 575: Luso-Brazilian Readings
Major literary works from 19th-and 20thcentury Portugal and Brazil, especially
narratives.
Prerequisite: Reading proficiency in
Portuguese and permission of instructor
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
POR 591: Portuguese Language
Acquisition I
Elementary Portuguese I for graduate students
with no previous study of the language. The
course is designed to introduce the basics of
the language promoting the development of all
language skills. 4 credits Letter graded
4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

PSY
Psychology
PSY 501: Analysis of Variance and
Experimental Design
The design and analysis of factorial
experiments having a single dependent
variable. Topics include between- and withinsubjects designs, mixed-factor designs,
interactions, trend analysis, and planned
comparisons. Emphasis on applications
in psychological research. Required of all
Ph.D. students in psychology. Prerequisite:
Undergraduate statistics, Co-requisite: PSY
508

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PSY 502: Correlation and Regression
Correlation, regression, multiple correlation,
multiple regression, partial correlation,
and introductions to some of the following
topics: factor analysis, mediational analysis,
structural equation modeling, relation of
regression to analysis of variance, analysis of
covariance, discriminant function analysis, and
multivariate analysis of variance. Required of
all Ph.D. students in psychology. Spring
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PSY 504: First Year Seminar
This course includes discussion of current
research and research practices by faculty and
visiting speakers. This course is required of all
first-year Ph.D. students and Masters students.
0-3 credits, S/U grading May be repeated for
credit.
0-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PSY 505: Structural Equation Modeling
and Advanced Multivariate Methods
Thorough coverage of structural equation
modeling and brief coverage of other
specialized techniques used in data analysis in
psychology, such as multi-level modeling and
cluster analysis (topics for brief coverage vary
from year to year). The course emphasizes
hands-on work with real data sets, using
standard statistical software packages.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
PSY 506: Psychometric Methods
This course surveys traditional and evolving
views on item design, reliability, and validity,
reviews statistical methods related to test
construction, and applies this material to
the design and evaluation of observational,
rating, and self-report methods in domains
of interest to psychologists. The course also
examines the impact of test characteristics
on data analysis and the role of test design in
theory construction.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PSY 507: Meta-Analysis
This course is an introduction to research
synthesis and the use of meta-analytic
techniques. The content is intended to be
a thorough yet practical coverage of basic
principles, with an emphasis on leading
students through the steps of conducting their
own meta-analytic project. A basic knowledge
of statistics commonly used in the social
and behavioral sciences is essential. Class
202

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
meetings will involve both didactic instruction
and discussion of readings and homework
assignments.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PSY 508: Introduction to Computer
Applications in Statistics
Computer protocol and introduction to
statistical packages and necessary utility
programs. Fall and Spring
0-1 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PSY 510: History of Psychology
Intensive reading in the history of psychology
from original sources. Emphasis is on class
discussion and relation to modern problems.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
PSY 511: Learning
A consideration of the basic principles of
learning. Analysis of the leading theories of
learning as well as areas of controversy and
dispute.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
PSY 513: Theories of Attention
This course covers some of the major
theoretical perspectives that have shaped the
attention literature, staring with historical
distinctions of early versus late selection and
ending with more contemporary mathematical,
neurophysiological, and neuorcomputational
theories. Specific questions will include:
"What is attention?" (is it a unitary thing or a
grab-bag of assorted processes), "How does it
work," and "What paradigms have researchers
used to study attention?" (dichotic listening,
priming, search, etc.).
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PSY 514: Sensation and Perception
This course covers the sensory mechanisms
that change physical stimuli (e.g., a picture of
your friend) into neural information, the major
brain areas involved in processing this sensory
information for various perceptual abilities
(eg., motion perception, color perception,
object perception, etc.), and the different
theoretical approaches to analyzing a given
perceptual phenomenon.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PSY 516: Judgment and Decision
Making
This course provides an overview of empirical
and theoretical work on

Spring 2021
judgment and decision making. Topics include
what decision making is,
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)

PSY 535: Advanced Research Methods
Advanced research methods employed in
clinical, personality, social, and behavioral
research. Fall or Spring

PSY 518: Memory
Review of theory and phenomena related to
human memory. Topics include representation
of schemas and categories, encoding,
forgetting, implicit learning, and memory for
procedures. Several recent models of longterm memory representation are discussed and
compared.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
PSY 520: Psycholinguistics
The psychology of language, including
the mental lexicon, sentence processing,
pragmatics, discourse, production and
comprehension of utterances in conversation,
language and thought, first-language
acquisition, and computational approaches.

PSY 537: Methods of Intervention:
Treatment of Internalizing Disorders
This course covers the theory and research
associated with the treatment of internalizing
disorders of adults, adolescents, and children.
Among the topics covered are the treatment
of phobias, school refusual, panic disorder,
general anxiety disorder, social anxiety, posttraumatic stress disorder, complicated grief,
obsessive compulsive disorder, and mood
disorders. In the treatment of each, particular
emphasis is placed on how therapy needs to be
modified depending on whether one is working
with a child, adolescent or adult.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

PSY 538: Method of Intervention:
Treatment of Externalizing Disorders
and Relationship Problems
This course focuses on the treatment of
PSY 524: Cognitive Development
externalizing disorders of adults and children
This course presents the developmental
as well as intimate partner problems like
perspective as applied to human cognition.
relationship discord and partner abuse. A
Topics include (1) characteristics and
developmental focus is taken as exemplified
constraints on cognitive abilities in infancy,
by coverage of child externalizing problems
childhood, and adolescence, (2) mechanisms of such as Oppositional Defiant Disorder,
developmental change, and (3) links between
Conduct Disorder, and Attention Deficit
cognitive development and selected applied
Disorder, Borderline Personality Disorder
topics.
and Partner Abuse. Treatments of alcohol
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, abuse and eating disorders in both teens
and adults are presented. Finally, treatment
B+, etc.)
of schizophrenia is addressed along with
PSY 533: Principles Applicable
coverage of the course of schizophrenia across
to Clinical Psychology: Historical/
the lifespan. Individual, couple, and family
systemic perspectives
treatments are reviewed.
A critical review of how principles of general
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
psychology apply to clinical psychology.
etc.)
The course material will be discussed
PSY 541: Social Psychology of Close
within the context of the history of ideas
Relationships
and major systems of thought as they relate
to conceptualization, assessment, and
High level overview of current theory and
intervention.
research on the social psychology of close
relationships.
Prerequisite: Psychology doctoral student.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
B+, etc.)
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)

PSY 534: Assessment: General
Principles, Clinical Interviews, and
Adult Psychotherapy
General principles of assessment; clinical
interviewing; structured interviews for
assessing axis-I and axis-II psychopathology;
ethics and cultural diversity. Prerequisite:
Clinical psychology doctoral student

PSY 542: Psychology of Addictive
Behaviors
Study of psychological, behavioral and
biological theories of addiction.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PSY 543: Attachment

Fall, 2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

203

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
This course examines current psychological
theories of infant-parent and child parent
relationships and adult-adult attachment with
special attention to assessment methods,
clinical applications and controversy regarding
the importance of early experience.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PSY 544: Emotion & Cognition
This course focuses on fundamental questions
regarding the interaction between emotion
and cognition, and how such this interaction
can be measured. Key topics will include:
differentiating emotions from other affective
states, understanding the functions of discrete
emotions, the role of the consciousness in
emotional experience, and whether emotions
can be controlled ; additionally, the course
will address emotion-cognition interactions in
the domains of memory, attention, perception
and reasoning/decision-making. We will also
address developmental changes and crosscultural differences in emotion and cognition.
The goal of the course is to be able to develop
a translational research proposal rooted in
basic research on emotion and cognition.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PSY 545: Psychopathology:
Conceptual models and internalizing
disorders
Theory and research on abnormal behavior in
children, adolescents, and adults. A lifespan
development approach is taken, with a focus
on classification, conceptualizations and
models of psychological disorders, and the
phenomenology, epidemiology, course,
etiology, pathogenesis, psychopathology, and
pathophysiology of internalizing disorders
such as mood and anxiety disorders.
Fall, 2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PSY 546: Measurement and Scaling
An historical introduction to the measurement
of psychological variables and survey of
contemporary scaling methods with an
emphasis on psychophysical scaling and
experimental applications.

Spring 2021
through a course project. Students are admitted support, cognitive dissonance, message
with permission by instructor.
framing, and fear communication. The
course also covers links between personality
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
characteristics and health and how broader
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
social and cultural environment affects health
and illness.
PSY 552: Social and Personality
Development
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
A survey of milestones and processes of
social development in infancy and childhood.
PSY 559: Psychology of Women's
Relevance to understanding adult personality
Health
and social relationships is emphasized.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, This course covers a variety of
psychologically-important topics in women's
B+, etc.)
health based on current research findings.
We address psychological contributors to
PSY 555: Social Psychology
An introduction to social psychology, a field of and consequences of women's health and
study examining how people feel about, think illness, focusing on diseases that affect women
differently or disproportionately than men
about, and influence others. Topics include
(including coronary heart disease, cancer,
attitudes, motivation, social judgements, and
AIDS, and autoimmune diseases), women's
interpersonal behaviors. Coursework focuses
reproductive health (including menstruation,
on identifying basic principles that transcend
contraception, pregnancy, infertility, and
particular content domains.
menopause), health behaviors (including
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
substance abuse, exercise, and eating), and
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
other topics such as violence against women,
women's mental health, and women as health
PSY 556: Stress and Coping
care providers and health researchers.
In this course, we examine current issues,
Co-scheduled with WST 559.
challenges, and questions in two related
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
areas of psychology: stress and coping. We
B+, etc.)
will cover classical approaches in addition
to recent empirical research and theoretical
PSY 560: Human Brain Function
development. Students are not expected to
Cognitive neuroscience is an interdisciplinary
have prior familiarity with the topic areas.
field, at the interface of systems neuroscience,
We will begin by reviewing definitions and
computational neuroscience, and cognitive
major theoretical orientations. In subsequent
psychology. In this course, we examine
weeks we will concentrate on issues relevant
the current theories and empirical research
to stress, coping, and related topics such
findings on the neural basis of cognition. We
as social support, across a broad range of
circumstances, rather than focusing on specific will cover anatomical, neurophysiological
and pharmacological correlates of behavioral
stressful contexts such as chronic illness or
functions such as perception, attention,
bereavement. For example, we will examine
motivation, learning, memory, cognitive
ways to define successful and maladaptive
control, and communication. We will
coping. We will also consider whether
evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of
social support is better conceptualized as a
commodity or as an individual perception. We various approaches used to student the neural
substrates of higher-order cognition.
will compare contradictory evidence about
the benefits of perceived control, and we will
discuss problems of generalizing research
findings to different ethnic, cultural, and other
groups.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.

PSY 561: Cognitive and Behavioral
Neuroscience I
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, Offered: Fall, Spring alternate years, 3 credits,
This course introduces students to neural
B+, etc.)
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
elements responsible for processing
information supporting sensation, perception,
PSY 549: Prejudice and Discrimination PSY 558: Theories of Social
cognition and movement. Starting with
Psychology:
Health
Applications
This course will provide an overview of
the philosophy of the mind and the history
theoretical perspectives, research methods,
This course provides an overview of the
of neuroscience, the course proceeds with
empirical findings, and practical applications
ways in which social psychological theories
an introduction of cells, neural signaling,
of psychological research on prejudice, stigma, and perspectives can be used to understand
transmitters and receptors. How these
and intergroup relations. Critical thinking
thoughts and behavior relevant to health
elemental units are integrated to support
about theorizing and research in this area will
and illness. It covers social influence, social
emergent properties, usch as object
be emphasized during class discussions and
comparison, pluralistic ignorance, social
recognition, is illustrated. Coversely, examples
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

204

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
of complex behavioral impairments resulting
from dysfunction in elemental units illustrated.
The course proceed to cover neral metabolism,
and its relation to disorders of memory and
motor dysfunction. Last, stress and its role in
neuropsychological disorders is discussed.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
PSY 562: Cognitive and Behavioral
Neuroscience II
Cognitive and Behavioral Neuroscience
illustrates how cellular circuits support
function. Classic experiments demonstrating
function fro the use of electrophysiological
data, lesions and transmitter manipulations are
discussed. Students interested in understanding
how individual neurons and neural circuits and
integrated regional systems directly support
specific behaviors will find this course of
interest. A textbook is used for the readings.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PSY 563: Neuropsychological
Assessment
Classroom discussions of issues in
neuropsychological assessment and design
of assessment batteries are combined with
practical experience in the assessment of
clinical populations. Each student is assigned
to a supervisor to learn assessment techniques
for research and/or clinical practice.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
PSY 564: Neuropsychopharmacology
This course covers the mechanisms of
transmitters and related drug action in the
nervous system. In addition to exploring
transmitter/receptor relationships, the course
covers the sequence of events initiated by
this action. Through understanding of these
processes, the course then links drug action to
nervous system outcomes such as movement,
cognition, pain and mood.
Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PSY 565: Functional Neuroanatomy
Just as a function can be derived from
the structure of everyday objects, so too
can function be derived from the study of
brain architecture and neural connectivity.
Accordingly, this course takes a structural
approach to the understanding of the nervous
system and behavior. To complement a
disciplinary focus on cognition, affect and
emotions, this course will emphasize the
connectivity of higher order brain regions.
Students will first be introduced to the global
organization of the nervous system and a

Spring 2021
general framework for information processing.
Then sensory and motor pathways will be
discussed imn more detail. The course will
end with topics such as the neurocircuitry of
addiction, emotion, and memory.
Offered
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
PSY 581: Integrative Neuroscience
Seminar I
This course includes discussion of current
research in Integrative Neuroscience by
faculty, students, and visiting scientists. This
sequence is required of all students in the
Integrative Neuroscience Program.
Fall, 0-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PSY 582: Integrative Neuroscience
Seminar II
This course includes discussions of current
research in Integrative Neuroscience by
faculty, students, and visiting scientists. This
sequence is required of all students in the
Integrative Neuroscience program.
Spring, 0-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PSY 583: Cognitive Science Seminar I
This course includes discussions of current
research in Cognitive Science by faculty,
students, and invited scientists. This sequence
is required of all students in the Cognitive
Science program.
Fall, 0-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PSY 584: Cognitive Science Seminar II
This course includes discussions of current
research in Cognitive Science by faculty,
students, and invited scientists. This sequence
is required of all students in the Cognitive
Science program.
Spring, 0-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PSY 585: Social and Health
Psychology Seminar I
This course includes discussions of current
research in Social and Health Psychology
by faculty, students, and visiting scientists.
This sequence is required of all students in the
Social and Health Psychology Program.
Fall, 0-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PSY 586: Social and Health
Psychology Seminar II
This course includes discussions of current
research in Social and Health Psychology

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

by faculty, students, and visiting scientists.
This sequence is required of all students in the
Social and Health Psychology Program.
Spring, 0-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PSY 587: Clinical Psychology Seminar
I
This course includes discussions of current
research in Clinical Psychology by faculty,
students, and visiting scientists.
Fall, 0-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PSY 588: Clinical Psychology Seminar
II
This course includes discussions of current
research in Clinical Psychology by faculty,
students, and visiting scientists.
Spring, 0-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PSY 594: Psychology of Gender
This class examines how gender affects and is
affected by behavior, thoughts, and emotions.
We investigate gender differences and
similarities across the lifespan and consider
various perspectives on the study of gender,
including psychobiology, social cognitive
theory, social role theory, and cross-cultural
research.
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
PSY 595: Human Development
An examination of the biological and
psychological development of children and
adolescents and its relationship to teaching
and curriculum development for diverse
learners. The course will focus on special
education programs, childhood and adolescent
psychiatric disorders, and societal issues.
Offered:
Fall, Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B
+, etc.)
PSY 596: Psychopathology:
Externalizing & Psychotic Disorders
Theory and research of abnormal behavior in
children, adolescents, and adults. A lifespan
development approach is taken, with a focus
on the phenomenology, epidemiology, course,
etiology, pathogenisis, psychopathology, and
pathophysiology of externalizing disorders
(e.g., conduct, disorder, personality disorders,
substance use disorders) and psychotic
disorders.
Prerequisite: Must be Psychology Graduate
Student
Spring, 2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
205

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
PSY 602: Assessment: Personality
Testing, Intellectual/Cognitive Testing;
and Child Parent Assessment
Self-report and projective measures of
personality and psychopathology; targeted
assessments and measures; intellectual and
cognitive assessment; assessment of children
and parents; ethics and cultural diversity.

Spring 2021
PSY 610: Seminars in Selected Topics
Topics selected on the basis of the needs of the
graduate program and research interests of the
staff. Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall, 0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Dissertation research under direction of
advisor.
Prerequisite: Advancement to candidacy (G5).
Major portion of research must take place on
SBU campus, at Cold Spring Harbor, or at the
Brookhaven National Lab.
Fall, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

PSY 620: Seminars in Selected Topics
PSY 700: Dissertation Research off
Topics selected on the basis of the needs of the
Campus - Domestic
graduate program and research interests of the
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
PSY 603: Ethics and Professional
staff.
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
Issues
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
off-campus, but in the United States and/
Ethics and professional issues. Required of
Spring, 0-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
all first-year clinical students. Prerequisite:
etc.)
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
Clinical psychology doctoral student
May be repeated for credit.
are considered on-campus. All international
Spring, 2 credits, S/U grading
students must enroll in one of the graduate
PSY 621: Seminar in Teaching
student insurance plans and should be advised
PSY 604: Intervention Practicum
Methods
by an International Advisor.
Exposure of the application of clinical
Theory and pragmatics of good college
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
intervention procedures.
teaching. Topics include lecturing, use of
May be repeated for credit.
discussion, types of evaluation of students
Prerequisite: PSY 537 or PSY 538, Must be
and
teachers,
factors
affecting
undergraduate
Psychology Graduate Student
PSY 701: Dissertation Research off
learning, ethics, student-faculty relations,
Fall, 2 credits, S/U grading
Campus - International
course administration, and audio-visual
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
PSY 605: Advanced Clinical Practicum devices.
(G5). Major portion of research will take
Prerequisites: Matriculated psychology
Exposure to the application of advanced
place outside of the United States and/or
graduate student; permission of instructor
intervention procedures.
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
Prerequisite: PSY 604 and Clinical psychology Fall or Spring, 0-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
option of the health plan and may also enroll
A-, B+, etc.)
doctoral student
in MEDEX. International students who are
May be repeated for credit.
Fall and Spring, 2 credits, S/U grading
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
PSY
695:
Graduate
Academic
and
PSY 606: Supervised Practice
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
Professional Skills Practicum
Clinical Psychology faculty meet with students
be removed. International students who are
as a group with follow-up individual recitation Students enrolled in the M.A. program in
not in their home country are charged for the
Psychology may gain degree-relevant practical
sessions to cover topics such as assessment
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
experience under the supervision of the
and treatment conceptualization of specific
covered by another insurance plan they must
cases that students are seeing in Psychological program advisor. This experience may include file a waiver be second week of classes. The
participation in public and private agencies
Center. In addition, methods of providing
charge will only be removed if other plan is
and organizations and experience in teaching
documentation of change in individual cases
deemed comparable.
support roles. Students are required to submit
are discussed as well as means of obtaining
All international students must received
corroborating evidence to support self-reported written progress reports and a final written
clearance from an International Advisor.
report
on
their
experience
to
the
faculty
information. Students present case material
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
sponsor and department.
to the group and receive peer and faculty
May be repeated for credit.
Offered
feedback about case conceptualization and
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-6 credits, S/U
treatment.
PSY 800: Full Time Summer Research
grading
Prerequisite: Clinical psychology doctoral
0 credits, S/ grading
May be repeated for credit.
student
S/U grading
Summer, 3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PSY 696: Readings
May be repeated for credit.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
PSY 820: Summer Teaching-CED
PSY 608: Clinical Psychology
1-12 credits, S/U grading
Internship
May be repeated for credit.
Qualified clinical students carry out supervised
clinical responsibilities in settings approved by PSY 698: Research
the faculty.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Russian Language and
Spring, 2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)

RUS

Prerequisite:Clinical psychology doctoral
student
Fall and Spring, 1 credit, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

1-12 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
PSY 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Literature
RUS 500: Reading Russian

206

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Intensive introductory Russian for graduate
students in other programs. Practice in
reading and translation; Russian prose; use of
dictionaries and reference materials; as much
attention as possible to special problems of
various disciplines.
Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
RUS 504: Introduction to Cultural
History
Russian cultural history focusing on recurrent
values and ideas. Topics explored include
issues of cultural identity, responses to
the West and Asia (in such movements as
Slavophilism, pan-Slavism, and Eurasian
theory), gender, and ethnicity.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
RUS 508: Russian Authors
A seminar in selected Russian authors,
focusing on one or two of the following:
Pushkin, Gogol, Dostoevsky, Turgenev,
Tolstoy. May be repeated.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
RUS 509: Dostoevsky and the West
Dostoevsky's major texts viewed in crosscultural perspective with particular emphasis
on literary and philosophical traditions
common to Russia and Europe.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
RUS 511: Studies in Literary Genres
A seminar devoted to a specific genre (poetry,
novel, short fiction, drama) in Russian
literature. May be repeated.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
RUS 513: 19th-Century Russian
Literature
A seminar on 19th-century Russian literature.
The course deals with prose, poetry, and drama
in the context of literary movements and
traditions.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
RUS 514: 20th-Century Russian
Literature
A seminar in turn-of-the-century, Soviet post
revolutionary, and emigre Russian literature.
The course deals with prose, poetry, and drama
in the context of literary movements and
traditions.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring 2021
A course in Russian syntax and advanced
grammar from various theoretical frameworks.

SCI

Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Science Teacher Preparation

RUS 591: Language Acquisition I
Elementary Russian I intended for graduate
students from other programs.
1-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
RUS 592: Language Acquisition II
Elementary Russian II intended for graduate
students from other programs.
1-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
RUS 593: Language Acquisition III
Intermediate and Advanced Russian intended
for graduate students from other programs.
The requirements for the course will include a
graduate-level component to be determined by
the instructor. May be repeated for credit.

SCI 510: Introduction to Science
Teaching
This course introduces the pre-service teacher
to the requisite skills, culture, and demands
of the profession. The pre-service teacher
learns to design curriculum, write lesson plans,
orchestrate classroom activity, probe student
thinking and assess student progress within the
context of a pedagogy that promotes an inquiry
approach to learning. This course requires onehalf day per week of clinical practice with
follow-up seminar in the campus Discover
Lab, out-of-class meetings with classmates,
and periodic visits to local public schools.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

SCI 520: Science Instructional
Strategies and Techniques
In this course, the pre-service teacher builds on
RUS 595: Practicum in Teaching
the pedagogical foundations set in SCI 510 and
prepares for student teaching in the following
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
semester. Greater leadership in Discover Lab
May be repeated for credit.
programs and teaching assignments in local
public schools is expected. Greater emphasis
RUS 599: Thesis Research
is placed on the integration of theory and
RUS 599 Thesis Research. One to six credits.
practice, extension of scientific inquiry for
S/U grading. May be repeated for credit.
diverse learners and assessment of student
1-6 credits,
progress within the context of teaching. This
May be repeated 6 times FOR credit.
course demands an inquiry into the nature of
science and the nature of knowing. It requires
RUS 601: Studies in Cultural Genres
one-half day per week of clinical practice with
Explorations in different forms of Russian
follow-up seminars, out-of-class meetings with
cultural representation offered by written texts, classmates, and micro-teaching assignments in
the arts, architecture, and popular media such
selected public schools. Prerequisite: SCI 510;
as puppet theatres, the bard tradition, and
entrance interview with the Science Education
cinema. Interaction among aesthetic genres
Committee; 3.0 cummulative graduate GPA;
will be explored with particular emphasis on
matriculation in degree (MAT, MS, Ph.D
the roles of literature in the other arts. Fall
or MA/LS) program; permission Science
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Education program 631.632.7075 Remark:
1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

RUS 602: Literature and Theatre
The relationship of literature and theatre with
specific examples taken from Russian cultural
history. The stage adaptations of Stanislavsky,
Meyerhold, and contemporary directors will be
studied as forms of aesthetic conjunction and
as responses to the social-ideological context.
Spring
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
RUS 603: Seminar in Cultural Theory
Studies in cultural theory with particular
reference to the works of formalism,
structuralism, the Tartu school of semiotics,
and Bakhtinian theory. Fall
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

RUS 520: Russian Syntax
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SCI 530: Applied Research in
Educational Settings
This course offers the pre-service teacher the
opportunity to conduct a place of original
research that will inform future practice. With
guidance from the PEP faculty and/or affiliated
departmental faculty, pre-service teachers will
formulate a question, design a protocol, collect
data and analyze within research traditions
appropriate to the question.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SCI 540: Clinical Experience and
Action Research
Within this course, students will engage in
weekly clinical practice experiences in campus
207

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
teaching labs, outreach programs or regional
schools. In addition, students will design,
implement, and present an action research
project. This course is intended to be taken as a
two-semester co-requisite of SCI 510 and SCI
520.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SCI 549: Science Field Experience I
This course requires teacher candidates
to complete 50 hours of supervised field
experience at various sites and with diverse
learners, including: high needs schools,
students with disabilities or special needs,
English language learners, and diverse
age groups. The field experience will
involve: observing instruction by sponsoring
teacher and other teachers using a structured
observation protocol, assisting sponsoring
teacher with class activities, tutoring
students, planning curriculum and negotiating
curriculum with students, assessing student
knowledge, and preparing written assignments
for the methods courses on the basis of the
above activities.
1 credit, S/U grading
SCI 550: Science Field Experience II
This course requires teacher candidates
to complete 50 hours of supervised field
experience at various sites and with diverse
learners, including: high needs schools,
students with disabilities or special needs,
English language learners, and diverse
age groups. The field experience will
involve: observing instruction by sponsoring
teacher and other teachers using a structured
observation protocol, assisting sponsoring
teacher with class activities, tutoring
students, planning curriculum and negotiating
curriculum with students, assessing student
knowledge, and preparing written assignments
for the methods courses on the basis of the
above activities. Prerequisite: Matriculation in
Science Education Program, SCI 549, SCI 510
1 credit, S/U grading
SCI 551: Supervised Student Teaching
High School Grades 10-12: Science
Prospective science teachers will participate
in a supervised student teaching experience
in selected Long Island secondary schools,
grades 10-12. The student teacher reports to
the school to which he/she is assigned each
full school day. Frequent consultation with
the supervising teacher helps the student
interpret and evaluate the teaching experience.
Applications must be filed in the semester
preceding student teaching.
3 credits, S/U grading

Spring 2021
SCI 552: Supervised Student Teaching
Middle School Grades 7-9: Science
Prospective science teachers will participate
in a supervised student teaching experience
in selected Long Island secondary schools,
grades 7-9. The student teacher reports to
the school to which he/she is assigned each
full school day. Frequent consultation with
the supervising teacher helps the student
interpret and evaluate the teaching experience.
Applications must be filed in the semester
preceding student teaching. Prerequisite: SCI
510, 520, 541, 542 CEE 505 and CEE 565;
matriculation in degree (MAT, MS, Ph.D or
MA/LS) program, 3.0 cummulative GPA;
submission of portfolio and interview with and
permission of Science Education Committee
631.632.7075

Prerequisite: Advanced knowledge of Slavic
languages
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
SLV 571: Comparative Slavic
Linguistics
An investigation of the major West, East,
and South Slavic languages with particular
attention to their historical development. The
course includes comparative and contrastive
studies in the areas of phonology, morphology,
and syntax.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SLV 578: Directed Independent Studies
Fall
May be repeated for credit.

3 credits, S/U grading
SCI 554: Supervised Teaching of
Science Seminar
This seminar, which will focus on problems
encountered by student teachers and public
school teachers at the secondary level, will
include study and analysis of science teaching
issues, including classroom management,
school culture, and social issues affecting the
schools and student performance. Prerequisite:
SCI 510, 520, 541, 542, CEE 505 and CEE
565; submission of portfolio and interview
with and permission of Science Education
Committee 631.632.7059; matriculation in
degree (MAT, MS, Ph.D or MA/LS) program;
completion of any content area deficiencies
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

SLV
Slavic Languages and
Literature
SLV 501: Special Topics in Slavic
Literature
Special topics in Slavic literature investigating
an author, period, genre, or theoretical issue.
Designed to provide a forum for advanced
research in critical methodology.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
SLV 502: Problems of Literary
Translation
The course addresses theoretical and practical
problems of translation from the Slavic
languages. Published translations of literary
texts as well as translations prepared by
participants of the seminar will be compared
and analyzed.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

SLV 579: Directed Independent Studies
II
Spring
May be repeated for credit.
SLV 580: Special Topic in Slavic
Languages I
The study of the phonology, morphology, and
syntax of a Slavic language other than Russian,
e.g., Polish, Czech, Ukrainian, Serbo-Croatian,
or Bulgarian. May be repeated if different
language studied.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
SLV 581: Special Topic in Slavic
Languages II
A continuation of the study of a Slavic
language other than Russian. May be repeated
if different language is studied.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

SOC
Sociology
SOC 501: Multivariate Statistics for
Social Science
This course is an advanced treatment of
descriptive and inferential statistics with
emphasis on the latter. Students will gain
practical experience in analyzing current data
from the social sciences through the use of
statistical computer programs. Topics include:
sampling, measures of central tendency and
dispersion, probability theory, hypothesis
testing, point and interval estimation, the
normal, binomial, and chi-square distributions,
parametric and non-parametric measures of
208

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
association and correlation, and bi-variate
regression.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SOC 502: Multivariate Regression
Techniques
This course provides an in-depth overview
of regression analysis, primarily focused on
OLS modeling. Topics include: inferences
in regression analysis, dummy variables,
interaction terms, and diagnostics and remedial
measures. The course concludes with an
introduction to other regression techniques
such as logistic and probability modeling.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SOC 504: Logic and Practice of
Sociology
This course provides an introduction to the
logic of empirical research in sociology. It
takes a broad overview of both quantitative
and qualitative methods; inductive and
deductive reasoning; and the process of theory
construction and testing, with an emphasis
on research design and the logic of causal
analysis. A knowledge of advanced statistics
is not assumed. Topics covered include
survey research, participant observation
and field methods, the comparative method,
experimental and quasi-experimental design,
content analysis, and the logic of multivariate
analysis.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SOC 505: Classical Sociological
Theory
A review of the intellectual development of the
discipline, its epistemological foundations, and
classical theoretical statements.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SOC 506: Contemporary Sociological
Theory
A review of the current major theoretical
orientations and newly developing theoretical
perspectives.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
SOC 509: The Practice of Ethnography
This course has four major objectives: (1)
to become familiar with contemporary
ethnogaphies; (2) to acquaint students with
the methodological literature on qualitative
sociology; (3) to consider theoretical and
epistemological issues in qualitative research;
and (4) to put some data production techniques
(observant participation, in-depth interviews,
and life stories) into practice.

Spring 2021
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.

Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.

SOC 510: Historical Methods in
Sociology
Major approaches, philosophical problems
of, and methods used in historical sociology.
Topics covered include causal analysis,
macrosociological comparisons, case-oriented
versus variable-oriented approaches, ideal
types, comparative typologies, narrative, and
issues of significance and objectivity. Special
attention is given to the problem of concept
formation.

SOC 518: Sociology of Gender
This course will familiarize students with the
field through a broad survey. Topics include
theoretical debates about construction of
gender identity, conceptual and empirical
issues in the study if gender dynamics and
empirical studies of the way gender constituted
by social institutions such as family, education,
workplace, and media.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SOC 512: Global Sociology,
Identities and Organizations in Global
Perspective
This course examines how increasing global
integration impacts human societies. It reviews
the broad trends that foster globalization
in the economic, political, cultural, and
social spheres, as well as the consequences
global change has had on how individuals
and communities identify themselves and
how they organize for collective goals. Core
issues on the global agenda such as conflict,
environment, technological and economic
development, demographic change, gender,
and human rights will be addressed; research
methods for the study of global society will be
introduced.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SOC 514: Advanced Topics in Global
Sociology
This course provides an advanced treatment
of major topics and debates in the increasingly
globalized social sciences. The course is
based on research activities of the faculty and
students. Topics may include global inequality;
globalization and gender; sociology of human
rights; war and revolution; transnational social
movements; comparative political economy;
globalization and immigration; globalization
and work; issues in global culture.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
SOC 516: Social Inequality
Causes, consequences, and explanations of
a prevailing social, political, and economic
phenomenon. The course assesses long-run
trajectories of inequalities in their various
forms and dimensions, and analytically and
theoretically considers the topic at the local,
national, and global levels.

This course is co-scheduled with WST 610.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
SOC 519: Advanced Topics in Gender
Studies
This advanced course will continue the
discussion of the graduate seminar on
Sociology of Gender, by examining theoretical
debates or controversies, examining specific
gender identities, examining the gender of
a specific institution (i.e., labor,law), or the
gendered dynamics of social interaction (in for
example, romantic relationships or sexuality).
Co-scheduled with WST 602.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
SOC 521: Social Psychology
An analysis of the three major domains of
social psychology: (1) symbolic interactionism
with a focus on the topic of identity; (2)
psychological social psychology with a
focus on the topics of personal perception
and attitudes; and (3) social structure and
personality with a focus on the topics of
norms, roles and socialization.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
SOC 523: Sociology of Education
Relationships between education and other
institutions. Internal dynamics of the school
and the classroom.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SOC 531: Economic Sociology
This course reviews the fundamental principles
of economic sociology and looks carefully at
the main areas of research in the resurgence
that began in the 1970's. The course covers
classic texts and considers key areas that have
animated the field in the recent era. Subjects
would include the rise of the large corporation,
ownership and control debate (including the
overlapping issues of corporate interlocks
209

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
and finance capital), the issue of markets and
transactions costs, the development of the
embeddedness perspective, labor markets and
the nature and extent of globalization.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
SOC 532: Organizations
This course will review classic and current
research in the area of organizations. It will
cover internal dynamics of organizations,
beginning with classic Weberian theory,
and continue by reviewing contemporary
approaches to human relations theory. It
will address key debates about the dynamics
of management-worker relations, and it
will scrutinize the debate of corporate
control. Also it will survey the literature
on interorganizational relations and
dynamics, such as interlock research to new
institutionalism.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
SOC 542: Deviance
Survey of recent research literature on various
kinds of deviance (crime, delinquency, and
morally stigmatized behavior). Controversial
issues in theory and research methods.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SOC 545: Social Movements
Unorganized collectives and their role in
change. Studies of specific social movements
and other collective behavior episodes.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
SOC 549: Social Change
The image of technological, generational, and
cultural forces on social organization from
historical and comparative perspectives.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SOC 555: War and the Military
A comparative and historical study of the
social organization of war and the military;
causes, conduct, and consequences of war.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SOC 556: Political Sociology
The study of political institutions and of the
politically relevant actions and attitudes of
individuals and groups. Particular stress is
placed on the reciprocal relationship between
social movements and political institutions.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring 2021
SOC 561: Cultural Sociology
Cultural sociology is a multi-faceted approach
used to analyze phenomena as varied as the
arts and popular culture, social identities,
social movements, markets, and politics. In
this course the major theoretical approaches
are presented along with the most significant
empirical work done in recent years. Classical
as well as contemporary texts are considered.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
SOC 562: Sociology of the Arts
The relations between social structure, social
change, and the development of major art
forms.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SOC 566: Funding and Grant Writing in
Sociology
This course will provide students with the
skills necessary to write grant proposals for
both government and private agencies. The
main requirement will be to prepare a proposal
suitable for submission to a particular agency
that funds the kind of research the student
plans to do.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
SOC 568: Dissertation Seminar
Under the direction of the seminar leader,
students help one another (1) prepare for the
Preliminary Specialty Field Exam (which
includes putting together a reading list) and
(2) work on a dissertation proposal and its
defense. The details of selecting a dissertation
committee and writing a dissertation are also
explored.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.

Stratification; Max Weber; Sociology of the
Future; Science of Sociology and Everyday
Life; The Study of the World's Advanced
Societies; Methods of Behavioral Observation;
Social Structure; Sociology of the Family;
Cognitive Sociology; Sociology of Work;
Transnational Social Movements; Economic
Sociology; War and Revolution; Sociology of
Gender; Sociology of Culture; Development
of Capitalism; Film as a Sociological Research
Tool; Funding and Grant Writing; The Three
Faces of Social Psychology; A Structural
Approach to Organizational Behavior;
Professionals and Professionalism; Sociology
of Modernity; Globalization and Immigration;
Research Support in Sociology; Sociology of
Sexual Behavior; Global Sociology; Gender
and the Law; Poverty and Homelessness.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
SOC 595: Special Seminars
Topics to be arranged. The seminar is built
around actual research activities of students
and faculty. The following topics have been
covered: Cultural Theory; Sociology of
Technology; Micro-sociology; Advanced
Topics in Marxist Theory; Sociology of
Emotions; Historical Methods; Ethnic
Relations; Biosociology; Comparative
Stratification; Max Weber; Sociology of the
Future; Science of Sociology and Everyday
Life; The Study of the World's Advanced
Societies; Methods of Behavioral Observation;
Social Structure; Sociology of the Family;
Cognitive Sociology; Sociology of Work;
Transnational Social Movements; Economic
Sociology; War and Revolution; Sociology of
Gender; Sociology of Culture; Development
of Capitalism; Film as a Sociological Research
Tool; Funding and Grant Writing; The Three
Faces of Social Psychology; A Structural
Approach to Organizational Behavior;
Professionals and Professionalism; Sociology
of Modernity; Globalization and Immigration;
Research Support in Sociology; Sociology of
Sexual Behavior; Global Sociology; Gender
and the Law; Poverty and Homelessness.

SOC 590: Independent Study
Intensive reading, under supervision of one or
more instructors, of material not covered in the 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
formal curriculum.
May be repeated for credit.
1-12 credits, S/U grading
SOC 598: Research
May be repeated for credit.
Execution of a research project under the
SOC 591: Special Seminars
supervision of one or more faculty members.
Topics to be arranged. The seminar is built
1-12 credits, S/U grading
around actual research activities of students
May be repeated for credit.
and faculty. The following topics have been
SOC 603: Advanced Topics in
covered: Cultural Theory; Sociology of
Quantitative Analysis
Technology; Micro-sociology; Advanced
Topics in Marxist Theory; Sociology of
Mathematical and statistical methods in the
Emotions; Historical Methods; Ethnic
analysis of quantitative data.
Relations; Biosociology; Comparative

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

210

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
SOC 604: Advanced Topics in
Qualitative Analysis
The use of personal documents, official
records, field observations, and interviews.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SOC 691: Practicum for Teaching and
Graduate Assistants
Individualized supervision of initial
(first two semesters) teaching assistance.
Discussion, examination construction, student
consultation, and grading. Register for section
of supervising instructor.
3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
SOC 692: Practicum in the Teaching of
Sociology
The exploration of teaching goals, processes,
and outcomes. Practice lectures are videotaped
and discussed; classroom visits; planning,
outlining, selection of course material; writing
of syllabus for Introductory Sociology section
to be taught as part of SOC 693 in following
semester.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring 2021
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
SOC 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
in MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver by second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.
All international students must receive
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
SOC 800: SUMMER RESEARCH
May be repeated for credit.

SOC 693: Practicum for Graduate
Teaching Interns
Supervised teaching of a section of Sociology
105 using the outlines, materials, and
techniques developed in SOC 692. Includes
weekly meetings of all persons registered for
SOC 693 and observation of classes by both
faculty and fellow graduate students.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SOC 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Dissertation research under direction of
advisor.
Prerequisite: Advancement to candidacy (G5).
Major portion of research must take place on
SBU campus, at Cold Spring Harbor, or at the
Brookhaven National Lab.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.

SPN
Hispanic Languages and
Literature
SPN 500: Reading Spanish
Through an intensive study of language
structures and idiomatic usage, with extensive
practice in written translation of literary
and scholarly texts, candidates for advanced
degrees are able to obtain the proficiency level
of the graduate Spanish reading requirement.
Several programs grant exemption from further
examination for successful completion of this
course (not for M.A. or Ph.D. candidates in
Spanish).
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
SPN 501: Historical Linguistics
General processes of language change,
as exemplified by the development of the
Romance languages, with particular reference
to Spanish.

SOC 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
off-campus, but in the United States and/
B+, etc.)
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab May be repeated for credit.
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

SPN 502: Methods in Linguistics
Research
Methods for elicitation and collection of
linguistic data and their analysis. Relation
between theory and research design, and
between qualitative and quantitative analysis.
Introduction to commonly used tests of
statistical significance, and to reasoning and
argumentation from limited data.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
SPN 503: Spanish Linguistics
Major issues related to the general structure of
the Spanish language (phonetics, phonology,
morphosyntax, semantics, etc.)
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
SPN 504: Contrastive Analysis:
Spanish and English
Topics vary, and may include linguistic
interference and its basis and manifestations,
in-depth discussion of specific syntactic/
semantic areas with reference to possible
Spanish/English interference, major
phonological differences between Spanish and
English and consequent learning difficulties,
and nonlinguistic factors that may affect
learning in different groups in different
situations.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
SPN 505: Hispanic Dialectology and
Sociolinguistics
Major theoretical issues involved in analysis
of geographical and social variation and with
the principal methods used in its investigation,
as applied to varieties of Spanish, Portuguese,
Catalan, and Galician.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
SPN 506: Bilingualism
This course studies the phenomenon of
bilingualism both at the individual and
at the social level. It examines the nature
of bilingual competence, theories of the
representation/storage of bilingual knowledge,
the acquisition/learning of multiple languages,
social attitudes towards bilingualism, the
consequences of language contact, and
bilingual education policies and their effects.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

211

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
SPN 510: Hispanic Cultures
An introduction to the essential aspects of
Hispanic cultures both globally and within
the U.S., designed to provide incoming
graduate students with sufficient background
to undertake the advanced study of Hispanic
languages and literature.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
SPN 513: Spanish as a Second
Language Acquisition
This course examines how language
development in bilingual individuals is
different from that of monolinguals, how
individuals learn their first language (L1), how
they learn their second language (L2), and the
relationship between both languages, including
how L1 affects the understanding of L2 in the
user's mind.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
SPN 514: Spanish Grammar
The student will be introduced to important
concepts in the study of grammar and syntax
of Spanish in view of modern linguistics
theories about our language facility. This
course also will describe the grammar of
Spanish spoken in Spain and Latin America.
Offered in
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
SPN 515: Spanish Composition and
Translation
Theory and practice of problems in
composition and translation with revision of
difficult points in advanced Spanish grammar.
Classroom analysis and discussion.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
SPN 523: Golden Age Literature
Major literary works within the Renaissance
and/ or baroque periods are read and analyzed
in depth, and their interrelation with the
cultural context is discussed.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
SPN 532: Interdisciplinary Approaches
to Hispanic Studies
The critical analysis of selected themes
in Spanish and/or Latin American culture
and society as represented across different
discourses and disciplines including literary
and cultural studies, film and media,
documentary and historical sources. Offered in

Spring 2021
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
SPN 542: Studies in Modern Spanish
Literature
Major literary works of the 19th and 20th
centuries will be read and analyzed in depth in
relation to their broader cultural and historical
content.
Offered in
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
SPN 551: Early Latin American
Literature and Culture
An introduction to the analysis of major works
and concepts of the colonial period and their
relevance for contemporary debates in Latin
American literary and cultural studies.

Prerequisite: Permission of graduate program
director, M.A. thesis director, and, or director
of the M.A. comprehensive examination
committee.
Fall and Spring, 1-6 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
SPN 591: Spanish Language
Acquisition I
Elementary Spanish I Intended for graduate
students of other programs
1-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SPN 592: Spanish Language
Acquisition II
Elementary Spanish II intended for graduate
students from other programs.
1-4 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

SPN 573: Studies in Modern Latin
American Literature
Major literary works of the 19th and 20th
centuries will be read and analyzed in depth in
relation to their broader cultural and historical
context.

SPN 595: Directed Independent
Individual Studies
For M.A. and Ph.D. candidates only.
Requires a written proposal signed by the
faculty member involved and the approval
of the graduate program director and the
departmental chairperson. No more than a
total of nine credits may be applied toward a
Spanish graduate degree or combination of
degrees.

Offered in
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Prerequisite: Permissions mentioned above
Fall and Spring, 1-6 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

SPN 582: The Hispanic Tradition in the
United States
A general historical analysis of the influence
of Hispanic culture in the United States as
a consequence of the continuous interaction
between Spanish- and English-speaking
people. Special attention is given to cultural
manifestation in a bicultural setting.

SPN 609: Literary and Cultural
Theories: Latin American and Iberian
Contexts
An introduction to literary and cultural theory
centered on the central questions that animate
theoretical discussion among literary and
cultural scholars today. Special emphasis is
placed on theoretical discourses and practices
originating in Latin America and Spain as
well as how scholars in these regions have
incorporated, modified and enhanced theories
produced elsewhere. A required course for
students in the Spanish Ph.D. program.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
SPN 585: Caribbean Literature
A course devoted to major writers and works
of the Caribbean area. Readings will be
analyzed in relation to cultural contexts.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

SPN 612: Topics Seminar
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, A seminar course designed primarily for
doctoral students about any of the various
B+, etc.)
areas of Latin American and Iberian literatures
May be repeated for credit.
and cultures. Recent topics include Latina
fiction, Cuba/Spain, Postdictadura, Fictions
SPN 588: Directed Master's Research
For work toward the M.A. thesis or preparation of Power, A World of Cinemas, Art and
for the M.A. comprehensive examination only. literature, Politics and literature. Prerequisite:
Admission to the Spanish Ph.D. program or
This course is mainly intended for students
permission of instructor
who are not continuing toward the Ph.D.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

212

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
SPN 613: Medieval Iberian Cultures
Reading and analysis of literary and
historiographical works of the medieval period
within their cultural and political context.

Spring 2021
relation to native and local cultures. Major
Dominican Republic, with some attention to
authors and historical events will be studied in the Anglophone and Francophone Caribbean.
depth along with current criticism and theories. Topics include imperialism and colonialism,
neocolonialism and postcolonialism, and raced
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
and gendered aesthetics.
May be repeated for credit.

SPN 662: 19th-Century Latin-American
Cultures
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, Course includes canonical literary works
as well as lesser known writers and genres.
B+, etc.)
Readings will be analyzed within specific
May be repeated for credit.
national and cultural contexts, but will also
SPN 623: Early Modern Iberian
engage with transnational movements and
Cultures
cultural productions. Recent topics include
Reading and analysis of literary, theatrical, and "Desertificaciones: War and Representation in
19th century Latin America" and "Queer fin de
historiographical works of the 16th and 17th
siglo: Modernity, Sexuality, and Gender in the
centuries within their historical and cultural
Southern Cone (1880-1910)."
contexts. Special attention will be devoted to
Spanish literature, theater and art of the era and Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
its relationship with the literary and historical
B+, etc.)
texts. Prerequisite: M.A. or permission of
May be repeated for credit.
instructor
SPN 671: Contemporary Latin3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
American Cultures
May be repeated for credit.
Course draws comparatively from the
SPN 641: 19th-Century Iberian Cultures multiple literary and cultural traditions
of Latin American countries, taking into
This course will focus on major issues
account significant aesthetic and political
regarding the multicultural and multilingual
developments throughout the region. Focus on
characteristics of Iberian spaces ¿that
necessarily entail their transatlantic dimension. time periods varies.
We will study both canonical and less-studied 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
cultural objects, including literature, music,
May be repeated for credit.
and visual culture in general. Special attention
will be given to the materiality of those objects SPN 675: Topics in Hispanic Cinema
¿e.g. newspapers, literature in installments,
and Media
manuscripts, digital communication, etc.
A course featuring diverse approaches to
Recent topics include ¿Art and Resistance in
the history, theory, and practice of film,
Times of Uprisings.¿
television and other audio-visual media in
Latin America, Spain, and the Latino US.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Recent topics include Women's cinema in
SPN 643: Contemporary Iberian
Spain and Latin America; Bunuel; Ripstein;
Cultures
Almodovar, Documentary Cinema in Spain
A course dedicated to the analysis of twentieth and Latin America, Cinema and InterAmerican Relations.
and twenty-first century literary and cultural
production and practices in Spain in relation to 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
the social and political context of the period.
Recent topics include Spain and its Others,
SPN 681: Directed Readings
tourists and immigrants, cultural and historical For students who have completed all doctoral
memory, the 1960s Spanish novel and the
requirements and wish to dedicate themselves
Latin American Boom.
to full-or part-time preparation for the
comprehensive examination.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SPN 652: Colonial Latin-American
Cultures
This seminar studies the textural culture
of colonial Latin America, dealing with
a diversity of genres, from legal writing,
historiography, autobiography and epic poetry
to visual materials, such as drawings, textiles,
decorated vases, etc. The course explores the
transatlantic Ibero-American traditions in

Prerequisite: Coursework toward the
Ph.D. must be completed; permission of
the dissertation director, graduate studies
director, or department chairperson
Fall and Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
SPN 685: Caribbean Cultures
Course focuses on the modern cultural
productions of Cuba, Puerto Rico and the

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
SPN 691: Practicum in the Teaching of
Spanish Language
Theory and practice of language teaching.
Applied methodology and linguistics in
classroom situations. A required course for
teaching assistants.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor,
department chairperson, or graduate program
director
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SPN 693: Practicum in the Teaching of
Spanish Language
This course is to be taken in conjunction with
the student's teaching assignment. Each week's
discussion centers on problems of applied
linguistics or grammar. Discussion will also
be focused on methodology (audio-lingual
method, pattern drills, language laboratory,
and preparation of examinations).
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
SPN 695: Dissertation Prospectus
Required of all advanced PhD students at
or near the end of their course work. The
course offers extensive practice in advanced
academic writing skills. The aim of the course
is to prepare the dissertation prospectus and a
fellowship proposal. The various components
of a strong proposal will be addressed: the
narrative, keywords, the methodological
or theoretical frame, the research plan, the
bibliography, and the personal statement.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SPN 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
For students who have already passed the
Ph.D. comprehensive examination and need
to devote their time to preparation of their
dissertation.
Prerequisites: Ph.D. comprehensive
examination completed and advanced to
candidacy (G5); permission of the dissertation
director, graduate program director, or
department chairperson. Major portion of
research must take place on SBU campus, at
Cold Spring Harbor, or at the Brookhaven
National Lab.
Fall, Spring, and Summer, 1-9 credits, S/U
grading
May be repeated for credit.
213

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
SPN 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus - Domestic
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place
off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
SPN 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus - International
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
place outside of the United States and/or
U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
in MEDEX. International students who are
in their home country are not covered by
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
be removed. International students who are
not in their home country are charged for the
mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
file a waiver be second week of classes. The
charge will only be removed if other plan is
deemed comparable.

Spring 2021
SUS 543: Age of the Anthropocene
Anthropocene is the term coined to explain the
current geologic era of our planet as shaped
and defined by human activity. This course
provides a deeper understanding of the ways
in which humans have interacted with and
transformed the planet during recent geologic
time, including the Holocene, Industrial
Revolution, and into the present. We consider
Earth as a global ecosystem, characterized by
interacting and dynamic systems, including
biophysical and anthropogenic systems.
This course critically examines the current
interpretations and applications of the term
Anthropocene, and identifies the key tenants
and societal outcomes of this powerful
and sometimes conflicting idea as applied
today in science, socio-political discourse,
sustainability, and beyond.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

SUS

SUS 548: Urban Climate Change
Mitigation and Adaptation
Climate change, with its anthropogenic causes
and devastating effects on human societies,
is the grand challenge of our age. This course
will consider how urbanized areas, especially
coastal communities, can reduce their negative
environmental impact while simultaneously
working to adapt to the harmful effects of
climate change that are already ¿baked in¿ to
earth¿s systems. Along the way we will
develop a better understanding of the feedback
loops that connect human activity with natural
systems and human well-being, analyze which
varieties of urbanization actually have the
worst environmental impacts, consider both
incremental and extreme varieties of risk,
and delve deeply into strategies and tactics
for addressing the intertwined mitigation
and adaptation challenges of climate change.
Our focus will be on public sector actions
and the public policy, urban planning and
governance responses that will need to be
made to regain equilibrium in our natural
systems and adapting our social systems to
new realities of life on Earth.

Sustainability Studies

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

SUS 503: Research Methods in
Sustainability
This course will provide a survey of
quantitative and qualitative methods used in
sustainability research in the natural sciences,
social sciences, and humanities. Students
will read primary literature and analyze the
research design. Students will formulate
research questions, identify appropriate
methods to investigate the question, and
develop a research proposal.

SUS 551: Soil Ecotoxicology Research
Design and implement a unique project
in ecotoxicology. Course covers literature
review, experimental design, hypothesis
formulation, data collection, data analysis,
hypothesis testing and write up. Students
will communicate their research orally and in
writing. Projects vary by year and will involve
ecotoxins such as acid rain, heavy metals,
pesticides, plastics or herbicides and organisms
such as soil microbes or earthworms. Course
may be repeated once with instructor

All international students must received
clearance from an International Advisor.
Fall, Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
SPN 800: Summer Research
May be repeated for credit.
SPN 850: Summer Teaching
Summer Teaching
S/U grading

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
SUS 562: Resilient Communities
As population and investment increase in
hazard-prone areas across the world, risks
and vulnerability are increasing as well.
Responding to increased risk and vulnerability
involves enhancing resilience or our ability
to withstand major shocks without long-term,
debilitating physical, social, or economic
damage. Resilience as a process can be
embodied by communities who proactively
prepare for, absorb, recover from, and adapt
to actual or potential future adverse events,
instead of bearing repeated damage and
continuously demand for federal disaster
assistance. This course explores the idea of
resilience as an outcome and as a process
from different perspectives and in different
contexts. We will first study resilience through
the lens of sociopolitical ecology of risk and
vulnerability. Then we will explore resilience
in the face of natural, social and economic
instabilities or shocks. Finally, we will discuss
long term risk management, governance
models, policies and politics involved in
making our communities more resilient.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SUS 566: Philosophy and the
Environment
Philosophical questions raised by human
relations with the natural world, ranging from
basic concepts such as nature, ecology, the
earth, and wilderness, to the ethical, economic,
political, and religious dimensions of current
environmental problems, including the
question of whether there are values inherent
in nature itself beyond those determined by
human interests alone.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
SUS 580: Research Seminar
A weekly series of seminars presented by
visiting sustainability researchers, SBU
researchers, and sustainability graduate
students.
S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

TAF
Theatre
TAF 500: Introduction to Graduate
Theatre
This seminar course will introduce graduate
theatre students in all tracks to each other, to
graduate faculty across disciplines, and will
encourage new collaborations and projects
214

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
for development during the students' graduate
careers. Theatre students will meet to discuss
the role of each artist, with emphasis on
the changing nature of collaboration and
the expanding art form in today's theatre
profession. Readings, written assignments and
collaborative projects are required.
3 credits, Letter graded (A,B,C, etc.),
Prerequisite: Permission of the Instructor,
Southampton and Manhattan, Semesters
offered:
Fall, Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B
+, etc.)
TAF 505: Dramaturgy I: Production
Dramaturgy
An introduction to production dramaturgy
in which students explore the types of
research and concept development necessary
to prepare already produced scripts for
performance. Research tools and methods,
investigations of cultural and social history,
critical writing, and issues in adaptation and
translation are discussed. Means of facilitating
communication within a production team
and between actors, designers, and directors
are examined. Other topics include season
planning, promotion and publicity, educational
outreach materials, preparation of protocols,
post-play discussion, and other audience
development techniques.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
TAF 506: Dramaturgy II: Literary
Management
Examining the roles of the literary manager in
the contemporary theatre, this course explores
the process of new play development and the
preparation of a new play for production. The
ability to read and write sensitively about
new plays, reading new plays and preparing
sophisticated play reports, how to talk to
playwrights about their plays, and how to
facilitate discussions with directors and actors
as they encounter a play for the first time
are issues examined in this course. New
plays from a variety of venues, including
professional theatres in New York City,
are read and discussed, and the process of
developing new plays from staged readings
through public performances are studied.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
TAF 507: Dramaturgy of Process: New
Play Development Workshop
This course for advanced students of
Dramaturgy allows them to apply practical
theatre skills to the development of new work.
Students will assist in the workshop production

Spring 2021
of a new play. This will explore NPD process
as it exists in the American Regional Theatre,
and learn the practical skills of running a playreading series, commissioning new plays,
communicating with playwrights, casting and
marketing. 3 credits, ABCF Grading

Focus is placed on key periods and themes
such as gender issues, political violence, death
and dying, love, etc. May be repeated once.
Spring, odd years, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
TAF 510: Western Theatre History
Theatre forms in the Western tradition, from
ancient to modern. This course is centered on
a particular critical or theoretic problem or
theme. It may be repeated as an independent
study with the permission of the instructor.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
TAF 510: Western Theatre History
Theatre forms in the Western tradition, from
ancient to modern. This course is centered on
a particular critical or theoretic problem or
theme. It may be repeated as an independent
study with the permission of the instructor.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
TAF 511: Far Eastern Theatre and
Drama
Course surveys the traditional theatre of
three Far Eastern (China, Korea, and Japan)
as related to: its history, dramatic literature
(Yuan drama and Beijing Opera of China;
Pongsan Korean Masked Dance-Drama; a
Noh play cycle, Kabuki, and Joruri Puppet
Theatre of Japan), point of departure will be:
the Eastern world view (namely Shemanism,
Confucianism, Daoism, and Buddhism) and
theatre; the concept of the actor's body and
mind as a microcosmic presentation of a
macrocosmic universe; his performance as an
act of becoming one with the macrocosm; and
the total nature of all performing arts elements
harmoniously operating together in creating
beauty on stage.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
TAF 520: Western Dramatic Literature
Course surveys forms of Western drama, with
particular reference to theatrical performance.
Focus is placed on key periods and themes
such as gender issues, political violence, death
and dying, love, etc. May be repeated once.
Spring, odd years, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
TAF 520: Western Dramatic Literature
Course surveys forms of Western drama, with
particular reference to theatrical performance.

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

TAF 521: South and Southeast Asian
Theatre and Drama
Surveying the traditional and modern theatre
of South and Southeastern Asian (India, Sri
Lanka, Thailand, Indonesia, Tibet, Nepal,
and Bhutan) as related to: it's mythic origins,
history, dramatic literature, aesthetic theory,
ritual functions, conventions of productions
and actor training. The point of departure will
be cosmology, especially that of Hinduism,
and world view of the people.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
TAF 523: Theatre in New York
A workshop seminar on contemporary,
alternative performance forms and mainstream
theatre. Emphasis on the development of
critical perspectives and the writing skills
needed to articulate them through seminar
discussions and writing workshops relevant to
performances seen on trips to theatres in New
York and the region.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
TAF 525: Topics in Theatre and Drama
Intensive studies of selected forms of theatre
and drama from various countries and periods,
designed to supplement rather than repeat
areas of study already undertaken in the
curriculum. May be repeated.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 1-3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
TAF 530: Directed Reading in Theatre
and Drama
Students read and evaluate the literature on
a topic of special academic interest under
the supervision of a faculty member. May be
repeated. Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
TAF 535: Theories of Theatre
Theories of the theatre, from the ancient
to the contemporary, are read critically to
develop a complex and varied conception of
the philosophical basis underlying approaches
to the theatre. Theorists read might include
Aristotle, Plato, Diderot, Rousseau, Nietzsche,
215

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Artaud, Brecht, Stanislavski, Grotowski,
Barba, Mnouchkine, Suzuki, and Zeami.
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
TAF 550: Teaching Seminar
Supervised student teaching of undergraduate
courses accompanied by a seminar in methods
and strategies of teaching theatre arts at the
University level. An independent teaching
project, in which the student works with a
particular faculty member, may be substituted.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
TAF 570: Directing Theory and Practice
Course surveys the art and craft of the
Director, with focus on contemporary practices
of directing and approaches to pedagogy.
Students will write papers and develop projects
in conjunction with advanced reading and
instruction.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
TAF 575: Adaptation Workshop
This course is an intense examination of
a playwright or group of plays with the
object of preparing a new adaptation or
stage version. The course will study a text or
group of texts, important criticism, notable or
significant translation and/or adaptations, stage
productions and/or film versions. Students will
submit an outline or rough draft of their new
version at the end of the course.
Offered in Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
TAF 576: Theatre Workshop
The workshops at Southampton Arts are
intensive classes in various aspects of the craft
of theatre and film, including playwriting,
screenwriting, directing, acting, solo
performance, interdisciplinary collaboration
(devising), and digital filmmaking, together
with lectures, readings, seminars, and panels
featuring nationally distinguished artists.
These workshops encourage participation by
visiting students, new theatre and film artists,
established artists, and teachers who will
be admitted by application and may receive
academic credit upon request. Graduate
students may take any Theatre Workshop
sponsored by the MFA program for academic
credit. Study may occur in Southampton,
Manhattan, or abroad. A submission of a
workshop application, and permission of
instructor are required. May be repeated for
credit.
1-6 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Spring 2021
TAF 590: M.A. Thesis
Independent study and research for M.A.
students, on special topics, theoretical or
cultural issues, or problems. Development of
material for research paper.
1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
TAF 591: Independent Project
Special project allowing advanced individual
work in an area of theatre study or practice.
Must be scheduled by arrangement with
instructor. Should result in an advanced paper
or project report. May be repeated.
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
TAF 635: Theories of Performance
This course examines different theories of
performance as they relate to theatre and
everyday life. Students explore ways of
thinking about the performing body and
different modes of cultural expression. There
is a performing component to the course in
addition to a final paper.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
TAF 638: Directing I - Principles of
Directing
This course will focus on the analytical,
organizational and creative processes
necessary to be a director. Topics include:
the role of the director and the collaborative
process; the history of directing; script analysis
and interpretation/ concept; stage, space
and composition; visual interpretation and
working with designers; casting and working
with actors; working with dramaturges; and
rehearsal and technical process.
Offered
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
TAF 639: Directing II - Advanced
Directing
This course will build upon the work covered
in Directing I and will focus on advanced
problems in Directing, including advanced
scene work, period styles, alternative forms,
and the challenges of contemporary drama
and or alternative performance. Prerequisite:
THR638 Offered
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
TAF 640: Theatre Design Workshop
Advanced assignments in theatre design.
May include design work on departmental
productions. May be repeated once.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
TAF 650: Playwrighting Workshop
Students write and discuss original plays,
evaluate their work, study techniques of
composition and formal organization,
and develop strategies for audience
communication. Advanced students may study
techniques for revision and the development of
material for performance. Some plays may be
selected for department production.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
TAF 651: Playwriting Workshop II
With the instructor of record, the student
will develop a plan for addressing problems
or the boundaries of approaches to creative
work specific to his or her needs for continued
development as a playwright. As deemed
appropriate by the instructor, the student will
work on a full length or one-act play or scenes.
Offered in Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
TAF 660: Acting Workshop
Intensive advanced study in a particular acting
technique, such as Kutiyattam, Suzuki, musical
theatre, Brecht, etc. Offered in conjunction
with departmental productions. May be
repeated.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
TAF 670: Directing Workshop
Advanced training in directing, which may
involve concentrated scene work, formal
experiments in performance, work on period
styles and problems, or preparation of
performances for public showing. May be
repeated once.
Prerequisite: Permission of Instructor
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
TAF 680: Dramaturgy Workshop
Students serve as dramaturgs for the
production of a play, providing research
support, studying editorial and interpretive
techniques, attending rehearsals, and
developing program materials for the audience.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
TAF 690: Professional Internship
A full-term internship at a professional
theatre. Students should submit an internship
216

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
description in the first month of work, then a
journal or evaluation of their work experience.
Prerequisite: Permission of graduate studies
director
Spring, 3 credits, S/U grading
TAF 691: M.F.A. Project
The project is to be undertaken at a
professional theatre or as part of the mainstage
production season at Stony Brook University.
Students submit a proposal for a project in
which they have a major responsibility as
an assistant dramaturg on a production or an
equivalent position. All proposals for projects
outside of the university must be submitted in
writing to the faculty supervisor and graduate
program director for approval.
Fall, Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B
+, etc.)
TAF 692: M.F.A. Thesis
Independent study and research for M.F.A.
students, on special topics, theoretical or
cultural issues, or problems. Development of
material for research paper.
1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

THR
Theatre Arts
THR 500: Introduction to Graduate
Study in Dramaturgy
This course surveys the field of theatre
scholarship, introducing students to research
tools, research methods, critical writing,
and scholarly values. Discussions include
reference to basic texts in dramatic literature
and representative research problems.
Prerequisite: Admission to graduate program
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
THR 505: Dramaturgy I: Production
Dramaturgy
An introduction to production dramaturgy
in which students explore the types of
research and concept development necessary
to prepare already produced scripts for
performance. Research tools and methods,
investigations of cultural and social history,
critical writing, and issues in adaptation and
translation are discussed. Means of facilitating
communication within a production team
and between actors, designers, and directors
are examined. Other topics include season
planning, promotion and publicity, educational
outreach materials, preparation of protocols,
post-play discussion, and other audience
development techniques.

Spring 2021
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
THR 506: Dramaturgy II: Literary
Management
Examining the roles of the literary manager in
the contemporary theatre, this course explores
the process of new play development and the
preparation of a new play for production. The
ability to read and write sensitively about
new plays, reading new plays and preparing
sophisticated play reports, how to talk to
playwrights about their plays, and how to
facilitate discussions with directors and actors
as they encounter a play for the first time
are issues examined in this course. New
plays from a variety of venues, including
professional theatres in New York City,
are read and discussed, and the process of
developing new plays from staged readings
through public performances are studied.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
THR 507: Dramaturgy of Process: New
Play Development Workshop
This course for advanced students of
Dramaturgy allows them to apply practical
theatre skills to the development of new work.
Students will assist in the workshop production
of a new play. This will explore NPD prcess
as it exists in the American Regional Theatre,
and learn the practical skills of running a playreading series, commissioning new plays,
communicating with playwrights, casting and
marketing.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
THR 510: Western Theatre History
Theatre forms in the Western tradition, from
ancient to modern. This course is centered on
a particular critical or theoretic problem or
theme. It may be repeated as an independent
study with the permission of the instructor.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
THR 511: Far Eastern Theatre and
Drama
Course surveys the traditional theatre of
three Far Eastern (China, Korea, and Japan)
as related to: its history, dramatic literature
(Yuan drama and Beijing Opera of China;
Pongsan Korean Masked Dance-Drama; a
Noh play cycle, Kabuki, and Joruri Puppet
Theatre of Japan), point of departure will be:
the Eastern world view (namely Shemanism,
Confucianism, Daoism, and Buddhism) and
theatre; the concept of the actor's body and
mind as a microcosmic presentation of a
macrocosmic universe; his performance as an

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

act of becoming one with the macrocosm; and
the total nature of all performing arts elements
harmoniously operating together in creating
beauty on stage.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
THR 520: Western Dramatic Literature
Course surveys forms of Western drama, with
particular reference to theatrical performance.
Focus is placed on key periods and themes
such as gender issues, political violence, death
and dying, love, etc. May be repeated once.
Spring, odd years, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
THR 521: South and Southeast Asian
Theatre and Drama
Surveying the traditional and modern theatre
of South and Southeastern Asian (India, Sri
Lanka, Thailand, Indonesia, Tibet, Nepal,
and Bhutan) as related to: it's mythic origins,
history, dramatic literature, aesthetic theory,
ritual functions, conventions of productions
and actor training. The point of departure will
be cosmology, especially that of Hinduism,
and world view of the people.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
THR 523: Theatre in New York
A workshop seminar on contemporary,
alternative performance forms and mainstream
theatre. Emphasis on the development of
critical perspectives and the writing skills
needed to articulate them through seminar
discussions and writing workshops relevant to
performances seen on trips to theatres in New
York and the region.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
THR 525: Topics in Theatre and Drama
Intensive studies of selected forms of theatre
and drama from various countries and periods,
designed to supplement rather than repeat
areas of study already undertaken in the
curriculum. May be repeated.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 1-3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
THR 530: Directed Reading in Theatre
and Drama
Students read and evaluate the literature on
a topic of special academic interest under
the supervision of a faculty member. May be
repeated.
217

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
THR 535: Theories of Theatre
Theories of the theatre, from the ancient
to the contemporary, are read critically to
develop a complex and varied conception of
the philosophical basis underlying approaches
to the theatre. Theorists read might include
Aristotle, Plato, Diderot, Rousseau, Nietzsche,
Artaud, Brecht, Stanislavski, Grotowski,
Barba, Mnouchkine, Suzuki, and Zeami.
Fall, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
THR 540: Design Theory and Practice
Course surveys principal design areas,
providing information about aesthetic theory
and methods of stage design. Students address
design problems and analyze a topic in design
theory in conjunction with readings and
instruction.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
THR 550: Teaching Seminar
Supervised student teaching of undergraduate
courses accompanied by a seminar in methods
and strategies of teaching theatre arts at the
University level. An independent teaching
project, in which the student works with a
particular faculty member, may be substituted.

Spring 2021
significant translation and/or adaptations, stage
productions and/or film versions. Students will
submit an outline or rough draft of their new
version at the end of the course.
Offered in Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
THR 590: M.A. Thesis
Independent study and research for M.A.
students, on special topics, theoretical or
cultural issues, or problems. Development of
material for research paper.
1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
THR 591: Independent Project
Special project allowing advanced individual
work in an area of theatre study or practice.
Must be scheduled by arrangement with
instructor. Should result in an advanced paper
or project report. May be repeated.
1-3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

THR 560: Acting Theory and Practice
Course surveys the field of acting-its history,
formal principles, primary techniques, and
contemporary practice. Students develop
course papers and, or projects in conjunction
with advanced readings and instruction.

THR 625: Theory and Criticism
Study of major issues in dramatic theory and
criticism and in performance theory. May be
repeated for up to six credits with instructor's
permission.

Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring, alternate years, 3 credits, Letter
graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.

THR 570: Directing Theory and
Practice
Course surveys the art and craft of the
Director, with focus on contemporary practices
of directing and approaches to pedagogy.
Students will write papers and develop projects
in conjunction with advanced reading and
instruction.

THR 630: Dramaturgy Colloquium
Through interaction with theatre professionals,
students develop independent projects around
topics of common concern to the profession,
and develop strategies for implementing
alternate plans for improving and developing
theatre. May be repeated.

THR 575: Adaptation Workshop
This course is an intense examination of
a playwright or group of plays with the
object of preparing a new adaptation or
stage version. The course will study a text or
group of texts, important criticism, notable or

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.

THR 636: Topics in Performance
Studies
THR 589: M.F.A. Thesis
The history and theories of performance
Independent study and research for M.F.A.
are explored. Seminars may focus on the
Dramaturgy students, on practical or
performing body, performance and political
theoretical topics related to the field of
change, avant-garde performance, performing
dramturgy. Development of materials for this
and cognitive science, virtual performance,
research paper may be related to the students
performance and identity. Depending on the
M.F.A. Project or other dramaturgical pursuits. topic, there may be a performance component
3 credits, S/U grading
and/or computer based projects.

Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)

3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

different modes of cultural expression. There
is a performing component to the course in
addition to a final paper.

Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
THR 635: Theories of Performance
This course examines different theories of
performance as they relate to theatre and
everyday life. Students explore ways of
thinking about the performing body and

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
THR 638: Directing I - Principles of
Directing
This course will focus on the analytical,
organizational and creative processes
necessary to be a director. Topics include:
the role of the director and the collaborative
process; the history of directing; script analysis
and interpretation/ concept; stage, space
and composition; visual interpretation and
working with designers; casting and working
with actors; working with dramaturges; and
rehearsal and technical process.
Offered
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
THR 639: Directing II - Advanced
Directing
This course will build upon the work covered
in Directing I and will focus on advanced
problems in Directing, including advanced
scene work, period styles, alternative forms,
and the challenges of contemporary drama
and or alternative performance. Prerequisite:
THR638 Offered
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
THR 640: Theatre Design Workshop
Advanced assignments in theatre design.
May include design work on departmental
productions. May be repeated once.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
THR 650: Playwrighting Workshop
Students write and discuss original plays,
evaluate their work, study techniques of
composition and formal organization,
and develop strategies for audience
communication. Advanced students may study
218

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

TMP 543: Leadership, Team
Effectiveness and Communication
This course focuses on business leadership,
teamwork and communications. It seeks to
answer the following three questions: What
do leaders really do? What makes teams
effective? How do you create persuasive
communications? The course addresses
Fall, Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B such topics as power and influence, leading
or the boundaries of approaches to creative
organizational change, managing corporate
work specific to his or her needs for continued +, etc.)
crises, building motivated teams, and
development as a playwright. As deemed
THR 692: M.F.A. Thesis
developing strategic communications. It
appropriate by the instructor, the student will
examines these topics with a goal of not
work on a full length or one-act play or scenes. Independent study and research for M.F.A.
only imparting knowledge about these
students, on special topics, theoretical or
Offered in Fall, 3 credits, S/U grading
managerial practices but also assisting students
cultural
issues,
or
problems.
Development
of
May be repeated for credit.
to acquire the skills necessary to become
material for research paper.
business leaders, team builders and srticulate
THR 660: Acting Workshop
1-3 credits, S/U grading
communicators. We will seek to bridge theory
Intensive advanced study in a particular acting May be repeated for credit.
and managerial practice by using case studies
technique, such as Kutiyattam, Suzuki, musical
and inviting business executives to the class.
THR 800: Summer Research
theatre, Brecht, etc. Offered in conjunction
The readings for the course come largely from
with departmental productions. May be
Independent study and research on special
repeated.
topics or problems related to work on the M.A. Harvard Business Review articles and case
studies on these topics.
or M.F.A. degree. May be repeated.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Spring, 1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
S/U grading
etc.)
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
May be repeated for credit.
TMP 544: Organizational Behavior
THR 850: Summer Teaching
An approach to understanding the behavior
THR 670: Directing Workshop
Supervised student teaching of undergraduate
of individuals in organizations is developed
Advanced training in directing, which may
courses accompanied by a tutorial in methods
with emphasis on implications for effective
involve concentrated scene work, formal
and strategies of teaching theatre arts at the
management. This approach is used to analyze
experiments in performance, work on period
University level.
decision problems encountered in managing
styles and problems, or preparation of
S/U grading
human resources. Topics include individual
performances for public showing. May be
and group decision-making skills, recruitment
repeated once.
and selection, employee ability, motivation
Prerequisite: Permission of Instructor
and incentive systems, job satisfaction,
Fall or Spring, alternate years, 3 credits,
Technology Management Prog performance assessment and management,
Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
retention, training, and employee development.
May be repeated 2 times FOR credit.
TMP 541: MANAGERIAL ECONOMICS
Summer, 1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
The techniques and approaches of
THR 680: Dramaturgy Workshop
microeconomic
reasoning
are
applied
to
Students serve as dramaturgs for the
TMP 545: Basic Financial Accounting
issues of managerial decision making in the
production of a play, providing research
Introduction to financial accounting which
corporation.
The
theory
of
the
market
and
support, studying editorial and interpretive
includes the accounting cycle, analysis and
the
price
system
are
closely
examined
for
techniques, attending rehearsals, and
preparation of financial statements, cash flow
the
purpose
of
identifying
those
areas
where
developing program materials for the audience.
neoclassical economics is helpful to the analyst analysis, corporate accounting, investment in
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, and manager. Special attention is paid to cost- stocks, and international transactions.
B+, etc.)
benefit analysis and models of economic
Summer, 1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
May be repeated for credit.
behavior. Summer
etc.)
1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
THR 690: Professional Internship
TMP 546: Managerial Accounting for
A full-term internship at a professional
High Technology Organizations
TMP 542: International Business,
theatre. Students should submit an internship
Technology and the Economy
Development and presentation of accounting
description in the first month of work, then a
information for managerial decision making
International
trade
and
investment
in
journal or evaluation of their work experience.
in a global technological environment. Topics
technology-intensive fields is examined from
Prerequisite: Permission of graduate studies
include budgeting, forecasting, profit analysis
the perspective of economic theory. Theories
director
and planning, performance evaluation, transfer
of foreign direct investment and international
Spring, 3 credits, S/U grading
pricing, capital budgeting, performance
competitive advantage will be examined in
measurement, and cost control. Special
the context of the changing global economy.
THR 691: M.F.A. Project
emphasis will be given to accounting issues
Summer
The project is to be undertaken at a
1.5
credits,
Letter
graded
(A,
A-,
B+,
etc.)
professional theatre or as part of the mainstage
techniques for revision and the development of production season at Stony Brook University.
material for performance. Some plays may be Students submit a proposal for a project in
selected for department production.
which they have a major responsibility as
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.) an assistant dramaturg on a production or an
equivalent position. All proposals for projects
outside of the university must be submitted in
THR 651: Playwriting Workshop II
writing to the faculty supervisor and graduate
With the instructor of record, the student
program director for approval.
will develop a plan for addressing problems

TMP

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

219

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
pertinent to high technology companies, such
as valuation of intangible assets. Summer
1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
TMP 547: Business Strategy
A capstone course that enlists a student¿s
general business knowledge in developing
corporate strategy. Essential to performing
this task is the introduction of guidelines
and concepts of Strategic Thinking Strategic
Planning and Implementation. As often
stated ¿Behind every successful company is
a superior strategy¿. Whether this strategy is
due to luck, position, incumbency, ¿vision¿,
instinct or a host of other internal & external
conditions will be discussed throughout
the course. Utilizing a simulation to create
an industry of successful corporations will
provide an insight into the dynamics of
competitive analysis, industry analysis,
the value chain, the integrative nature of a
corporation and the strategic process.
1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
TMP 548: Ethics, Corporate
Governance and Control Systems
This course explores the values that
govern corporate behavior. Topics include
understanding ethical behavior, corporate
ethics programs, employees responsibilities,
and codes of conducts and governance.
Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) is examined as
watershed legislation that has implications
for U.S. companies and non-U.S.-based,
multinational companies doing business in
the U.S. Examples of similar legislation in
the EU and elsewhere are covered. Related
topics are corporate social responsibility
(CSR) (with cases and examples from U.S.
and abroad), ways to promote employee
engagement, human resource management risk
assessment, and human resource information
systems. The course also covers mechanisms
for developed a positive organizations
culture and engaged workforce. This includes
review of employee relations programs,
developing and learning a high performing
team, and developing a continuous learning
organizational culture. Case discussions and
exercises (e.g., developing a code of conduct)
provide hands-on learning experiences.
Spring, 1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
TMP 549: Negotiation Strategy
This course is designed to equip students with
the basic theories and skills of negotiation.
Accordingly, it consists of several parts. The
first part is the introduction to the newly
development approaches to negotiation; how
you can improve your negotiation skills and
outcomes. Also some commonly encountered

Spring 2021
negotiation tactics will be introduced, not
to make you victims of those tactics. The
second is simulation; students will engage
in several negotiation simulations with other
students under specific negotiation mandates
and the outcomes will be reviewed. The last
is a brief introduction to the game theory with
an emphasis on the cooperative games; this
part deals with the theoretical foundations of
bargaining and dispute resolution. Knowledge
from economics and mathematics will be
helpful but not required.
Offered in Spring, 1.5 credits, Letter graded
(A, A-, B+, etc.)
TMP 551: Data Analysis for
Technology Managers
The use and limitations of mathematical and
statistical techniques, especially for the use of
data in choosing between alternative strategies
for companies. Probability, estimation,
hypothesis testing, analysis of variance, and
regression analysis are among the topics
covered. Summer
1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
TMP 552: Management Science for
Technology Managers
An introduction to the use of modeling in
management, particularly in high technology
contexts. Basic concepts of management
science are covered and a variety of models
are examined for application in quantitative
decision making. Summer
1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
TMP 555: Technology, Government
and Business
Examines the role of government as a
regulator of technological business activity,
a customer for technological products
and services, a source of funding for
technological development, and a facilitator
of technological innovation. Special topics
include technology assessment, technology
transfer, and frameworks for national and
regional technology policy.
Summer, 1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
TMP 560: Business Analytics
An introduction to mathematical models useful
in the analysis of management problems.
We motivate each topic by managerial
applications, and we analyze problems using
modern software. Topics include optimization
and linear programming, sensitivity analysis,
network modeling, integer linear programming
and goal programming, and MOLP.
1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

TMP 573: Basic Marketing Principles
and the Information Economy
Introduction to the basic principles of
marketing, including: the influence of the
marketplace and the marketing environment on
marketing decision making; the determination
of a firm's product, prices, channels, and
communication strategies; and the firm's
system for planning and controlling its
marketing effort. Special emphasis will
be given to marketing in information
industries and knowledge intensive industries.
Prerequisites: TMP 552
Summer, 1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
TMP 574: Marketing of Technology
Based Products
Adaptation and extension of basic marketing
concepts for technological products. Topics
include: understanding unarticulated user
needs, demand forecasting and strategic
planning in technology markets, product
design and architecture, product platform
strategy, managing new product realization
programs, and managing the technology
adoption lifecycle. Summer
1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
TMP 575: Introduction to Management
Information Systems
The analysis and design of information
systems to aid in managerial decision making
and the effective operation of corporations.
Pertinent computing, telecommunication
and systems technologies will be surveyed.
Summer
1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
TMP 576: Management Information
Systems for Accounting, Budgeting
and Human Resources Management
Examination of recent MIS options for
specialized functions in an organization,
such as accounting, budgeting and human
resources. Includes review and assessment of
integrated multi-function software suites for
organizational management, and comparison
of packaged software systems versus webbased subscription software services. Summer
1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
TMP 577: Business Project A
First part of course-pair TMP577 & TMP578.
Students choose a project that focuses on
technology management issues in their own
industry or organization and apply tools learnt
in other courses to analyze the issues. Part A
of this pair of courses concentrates on problem
formulation and the planning of research and
analysis. This course is intended to commence
220

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
mid-way through the program and be taken
concurrently with the next several courses in
the program. Prerequisites: TMP 552
Summer, 1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
TMP 578: Business Project B
Second part of course-pair TMP577 &
TMP578. Students take the issues formulated
during Part A of this pair of courses and
proceed to implement the research plan also
developed in that course. Part B of this pair
of courses involves detailed data collection,
analysis, and reporting of results. This course
is intended to commence three-quarters of
the way through the program and to be taken
concurrently with the next several courses.
Submission of the project report and a formal
presentation of results are required near the
end of the program. Summer
1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

Spring 2021
TMP 592: Role of Technology
Standards
Second part of course-pair TMP591 &
TMP592. Introduction to salient issues
facing managers of enterprises involved
in the development and implementation of
new technologies. Use will be made of case
histories and presentations by technological
managers and innovators, wherever possible.
Part B of this pair of courses will concentrate
on the role of technical standards in the
dynamics of competition between firms in high
technology industries. Summer
1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
TMP 593: Developing Technology
Management Solutions (A)
First part of course-pair TMP593 & TMP595.
Special course customized each year to
address current trends and solutions to
management problems in technological
enterprises. Examples would include trends
in electronic commerce, new approaches to
product development strategy for technology,
information security and privacy, or trends in
the biotechnology industry. The course will
involve field to companies and guest lectures
by executives from technology companies
wherever possible.

TMP 585: Operations Management for
Technology Organizations
Introduction to the analysis and measurement
of processes for creating and delivering
goods and services. Covers trade-offs in
operations management decisions, product and
process planning, layout and location strategy,
production scheduling, inventory control,
Summer, 1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
quality management, computer integrated
etc.)
manufacturing, and cost justification,
especially in the adoption of new technologies. TMP 594: Finance A
Summer, 1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, The goal of the Finance course sequence is
to introduce students to the modern finance
etc.)
theory and its application to the real world
TMP 586: Human Resources
financial decision-making. Finance A is the
Management for High Technology
first part of the sequence that focuses on the
Environments
first fundamental corporate finance issue: how
to make investments that benefit shareholders.
Survey of issues in personnel recruitment,
We will start with the analysis of financial
employee selection and classification,
statements to better understand measures of a
workforce evaluation, wages, benefits,
company's financial performance. We will then
regulations, unionization, training, quality
introduce the concept of time value of money
management, and employee performance in
and valuation of cash flows. Then we will
high technology settings.
Summer, 1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, apply the valuation concepts to learn how to
choose investment opportunities that maximize
etc.)
shareholders' wealth.
TMP 591: Technology Management
1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
and Emerging Industries
First part of course-pair TMP591 & TMP592. TMP 595: Developing Technology
Introduction to salient issues facing managers Management Solutions (B)
Second part of course-pair TMP593 &
of enterprises involved in the development
TMP595. Special course customized each
and implementation of new technologies.
year to address current trends and solutions
Usp will be made of case histories and
to management problems in technological
presentations b~ technological managers
enterprises. Examples would include trends
and innovators, wherever possible. Part A of
in electronic commerce, new approaches to
this pair of courses will concentrate on the
relationship between technological innovation product development strategy for technology,
information security and privacy, or trends in
and emerging industries. Summer
the biotechnology industry. The course will
1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

involve field to companies and guest lectures
by executives from technology companies
wherever possible. Summer
1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
TMP 596: Finance B
The goal of the Finance course sequence is
to introduce students to the modern finance
theory and its application to the real world
financial decision-making. Finance B is the
second part of the sequence that focuses on
the second fundamental corporate finance
issue: how to finance investment opportunities.
We will start with bond and stock valuation,
recognizing that debt and equity are the main
sources of funds for a company. We will then
learn how to estimate the cost of debt and
equity for a company that wants to finance its
investments. Finally, we will combine the cost
of debt and equity into a unified framework
that estimates a company's overall cost of
capital.
1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
TMP 597: Technology Management
and Strategy
Concepts and techniques of strategic
management are examined and applied
to relevant cases involving technology
management. The class synthesizes all
elements of the program and examines how an
organization can plan and develop initiatives,
evaluate their effectiveness, and manage the
change process with an emphasis on corporate
strategy.
1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
TMP 598: Technology and
Entrepreneurship
Concepts and techniques of strategic
management are examined and applied
to relevant cases involving technology
management. The class synthesizes all
elements of the program and examines how an
organization can plan and develop initiatives,
evaluate their effectiveness, and manage
the change process with an emphasis on
entrepreneurial strategy.
1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
TMP 599: Intellectual Property Strategy
Concepts and techniques of intellectual
property strategy are examined and applied
to relevant cases involving technology
management. The class synthesizes all
elements of the program and examines how an
organization can plan and develop initiatives,
evaluate their effectiveness, and manage the
change process with an emphasis on managing
and deploying intellectual property.
1.5 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
221

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

Spring 2021

TNT 506: BASIC MGT

Students participate in a multi-term,
multidisciplinary project, working with
team members ranging from sophomores
through seniors and graduate students.
Projects are advised by one or more faculty
on topics of research, design, innovation and
entrepreneurship. While a project is frames
within a faculty member's area of expertise,
contributions are needed from a diverse array
of disciplines. This course is intended for
doctoral students who dissertation research is
directly related to a project led by his or her
faculty advisor. Students registered for this
course will take a leadership role and assist the
faculty advisor in management of the team.
May be repeated for credit. Prerequisites:
Permission of Faculty Project Mentor.

TNT 515: APPL PROB & STATS

0-3 credits,
May be repeated for credit.

TNT
Technology and Training
TNT 501: TECH COM MGT & ENGR
TNT 502: PROD & OPER MGT
TNT 503: MIS
TNT 504: INTL MGT
TNT 505: HITEC VENTURE

VIP

WNS

Vertically Integrated Projects

Women's Studies:Social
Sciences

VIP 595: Graduate Multidisciplinary
Project
Students participate in a multi-term,
multidisciplinary project, working with
team members ranging from sophomores
through seniors and graduate students.
Projects are advised by one or more faculty
on topics of research, design, innovation and
entrepreneurship. While a project is framed
within a faculty member's area of expertise,
contributions are needed from a diverse array
of disciplines. This course is intended for
master's students who can take a leadership
role in a project subtask. Students are expected
to maintain involvement with the same project
team for multiple terms. Students may add
up to 2-credits towards their effort by coregistering for VIP 596. Prerequisites: VIP
Program participant.

WNS 559: Psychology of Women's
Health
This course covers a variety of
psychologically-important topics in women's
health based on current research findings.
We address psychological contributors to
and consequences of women's health and
illness, focusing on diseases that affect women
differently or disproportionately than men
(including coronary heart disease, cancer,
AIDS, and autoimmune diseases), women's
reproductive health (including menstruation,
contraception, pregnancy, infertility, and
menopause), health behaviors (including
substance abuse, exercise, and eating), and
other topics such as violence against women,
women's mental health, and women as health
care providers and health researchers.

1 credit, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
VIP 596: Graduate Multidisciplinary
Project Practicum
The course is a supplement to VIP 595 for
team members wishing to commit more
effort towards their multidisciplinary project.
Students who enroll in 1-credit of VIP 595
may register up to 2-credits of VIP 596 in
a semester for a total of 3 VIP credits. This
course may be repeated for credit.
1-2 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

Co-scheduled with WST 559.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)

WRT
Writing
WRT 506: Studies in Literary Theory
Prerequisite: Matriculation in a graduate
program or the composition studies certificate.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
WRT 509: Studies in Language and
Linguistics

VIP 695: Multidisciplinary Project
Leadership
Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

WRT 592: Problems in Teaching
Writing or Composition
This course provides an overview of writing
pedagogy as applied to tutoring in a Writing
Center or in an English classroom. Included in
the course is fieldwork in the campus Writing
Center.
Fall, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
WRT 605: Scientific Writing for
Chemists
This course, taught primarily in a workshop
format, will prepare students to write graduate
papers, communications, journal articles,
and dissertations. Rhetorical principles
of organization, attention to audience,
conciseness, cogency, clarity, and using an
appropriate scientific voice will be stressed, as
will correctness of grammar and punctuation,
including grammatical issues particularto nonnative speakers of English. The class will
examine in detail models of clear writing from
scientific journals. Students will also bring
their writing to class frequently for review by
both the instructor and their classmates so that
students will gradually internalize standards
for writing and be able to write effectively in
all genres typically used by chemists. Offered
Spring, 3 credits, S/U grading
WRT 612: Theories in Composition
This course explores the relationship between
reading and writing skills, the differences
between speech production and writing
production, and the relationship between
literacy, culture, and language politics.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
WRT 613: Research in Composition
This course provides an introduction to the
nature of empirical research in Composition
Studies. Students will survey landmark
research studies, learn how to read research
reports critically, and conduct a mini-research
project in their own classrooms or tutoring
situations to analyze underlying causes of
students' writing problems.
Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+,
etc.)
WRT 614: Topics in Composition and
Writing
This course will consist of directed readings
in particular areas of interest in rhetoric, the
history of rhetoric and pedagogy, and teaching
strategies for teachers.
Offered
Fall and Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
222

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
WRT 621: Graduate-Level Writing
This course, designed for a mixture of
students from any of our graduate programs
or departments, is a workshop in writing
academic papers, theses, or dissertations,
with attention to research methods, drafting,
organizing, revising, and editing work that the
students have already been assigned in their
primary departments.

Spring 2021
women in the labor movement, and women
and social policy.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.

WST 512: Advanced Topics in Gender
Studies
This advanced course will continue the
1-3 credits, S/U grading
discussion of the graduate seminar on
May be repeated for credit.
Sociology of Gender, by examining theoretical
debates or controversies, examining specific
WRT 687: Independent Study
A student and faculty member agree on a topic gender identities, examining the gender of
of student¿s interest which may not be offered a specific institution (i.e., labor,law), or the
in any seminars, creating a reading list to focus gendered dynamics of social interaction (in for
example, romantic relationships or sexuality).
on. A final research paper or major annotated
Co-scheduled with WST 602.
bibliography will be required to demonstrate
substantive knowledge of the field and/or
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
topic. A program form must be completed and B+, etc.)
submitted to the PWR by the student before
May be repeated for credit.
the add/drop period ends.
WST 550: Women of Color in The
0-12 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
Modern World: Shifting Identities and
May be repeated for credit.
Feminist Visions
This course explores the various ways in
WRT 690: Directed Readings
which gender, race, and class, along with
May be repeated for credit.
other aspects of identity, shape the lives and
experiences of women of color in the United
WRT 698: Practicum in Teaching
States and globally. It presents the ongoing
Writing
debates concerning the interconnections
This course provides hands-on experience and
of gender, race, and shifting identities. It
instruction in the basics of writing pedagogy,
will examine the relationships between the
including designing writing assignments,
construction of personal identities, identity
sequencing assignments, motivating writing,
statuses, cultural and ideological meaning
writing skill development and evaluating
systems, and the search for alternative images.
writing. Students will also be given a
Permission from advisor required.
preliminary overview of the major theories
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)
driving composition pedagogy.
3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-, B+, etc.)

WST
Women's Studies
WST 510: Gender and Culture
A variable topics course on the many ways in
which culture and gender interact. Possible
topics include women in multiethnic America,
women in the labor movement, and women
and social policy.
Co-scheduled with HIS 515.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
WST 511: Gender and Culture
A variable topics course on the many ways in
which culture and gender interact. Possible
topics include women in multiethnic America,

WST 559: Gender and Health
This course explores gender differences in
physical and mental health through the study
of psychology, sociology, medicine, and
epidemiology.
Co-scheduled with PSY 559.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
WST 595: Reading Colloquium in
Women's History
A topics course dealing with such subjects
as women in social movements, the place of
gender in particular historical circumstances,
imperialism and woman, changing views of
sexuality, or relations between family policies
and other political programs. This course
offered as both HIS 595 and WST 595.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

WST 597: Directed Readings for M.S.
Students
Directed Readings must be approved in writing
by the Advisor, Director of Graduate Studies,
and the supervising professor. 1-3 credits each
semester, repetitive credit.
Fall or Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
WST 598: Thesis Research
Research and writing of M.A. thesis
supervised by faculty advisor.
Offered Fall, Spring, 1-3 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
WST 599: Independent Study
A student and faculty member agree on a topic
not offered in any seminars and a reading
list to study at weekly or biweekly meetings.
A final research paper or major annotated
bibliography will be required. The syllabus
must be filed with the program's form before
the add/drop period ends.
Fall and Spring, 1-3 credits, Letter graded (A,
A-, B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
WST 600: Feminist Interdisciplinary
Histories and Methods
Rather than begin with an exploration of "the"
feminist methodology in Women's and Gender
Studies, or an account of "the" history of
feminism, this course will explore what counts
as "history", as "method", and as "evidence"
in feminist scholarship. Since its emergence
as distinct knowledge project within the
academy, feminism has raised questions about
how we know what we know, who gets to
speak and for whom, and what are legitimate
fields of inquiry. Our goal will be to trace
some of the ways in which feminist scholars
have sought to intervene in debates about
disciplinary as opposed to interdisciplinary
forms of knowledge, objective as opposed
to "situated" knowledge, evidence versus
experience, history versus fiction, etc.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
WST 601: Feminist Theories
This course will examine the key debates and
concepts that have informed contemporary
articulations of feminist theory. We will focus
on how feminist theory is produced, along with
gender, through configurations of nation, race,
citizenship, sexuality, and class in different
historical and cultural contexts. Because of
the many varieties of feminist theories, this
course may focus on a particular theoretical
tradition or conceptual problem. Some
examples of past and possible future feminist
223

GRADUATE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
theories courses include: Feminist Theories/
Queer Theories; Feminist Theories: Race,
Gender, and Nation; Feminist Theories/Neoliberal Bio-logics; Feminist Literary Theory;
Feminist Science Studies; and Feminism and
Psychoanalysis. See addendum C for more
detailed descriptions of some sample focused
theory classes.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
WST 602: Social Perspectives on
Feminist Theory
This course introduces students to the
main currents of feminist social, political,
and intellectual theory. It will explore
theories and texts and the linkages between
developing feminism and such fields as
economics, sociology, history, and philosophy.
Prerequisite: Admission to the Graduate
Certificate Program in Women's Studies CoScheduled with SOC 519.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
WST 610: Advanced Topics in
Women's Studies
A variable topics seminar course in women's
studies for the advanced student. Topics might
include feminist peace politics, women in
Third World cinema, feminist theology, or
feminist philosophy. Course may be repeated
as topic varies. Sections of this course are coscheduled with SOC 509, PHI 615, and PHI
616.
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
May be repeated for credit.
WST 680: Interdisciplinary Research
Design
This seminar is designed as a workshop
to apply knowledge of methods and
methodologies in the interdisciplinary
area of Women's and Gender Studies to
students' own research. Course topics will
include formulating and refining research
questions; developing appropriate theoretical
frameworks; articulating scholarly value; and
thinking critically about the methods used in
feminist interdisciplinary research, across the
Humanities, Social Sciences and Sciences.
Students are expected to work collaboratively,
presenting their individual works-in-progress
to the class for constructive critique. Over
the semester, students will develop either a
research proposal for funding agencies and/or
their dissertation proposal (prospectus).

Spring 2021
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
WST 690: Directed Readings for
Doctoral Candidates
A student and faculty member agree on a
corpus of texts to read and discuss at weekly
or biweekly meetings. The reading list must be
filed with the program¿s form before the add/
drop period ends.

off-campus, but in the United States and/
or U.S. provinces. Please note, Brookhaven
National Labs and the Cold Spring Harbor Lab
are considered on-campus. All international
students must enroll in one of the graduate
student insurance plans and should be advised
by an International Advisor. Semesters
Offered:
Fall, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

Fall and Spring, 1-12 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.

WST 701: Dissertation Research off
Campus-International
WST 696: Self-Directed Readings
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take
For doctoral students who have completed
place outside of the United States and/or
all course requirements and wish to dedicate
themselves to full- or part-time preparation for U.S. provinces. Domestic students have the
option of the health plan and may also enroll
the Comprehensive Examination.
in MEDEX. International students who are
Fall and Spring, 3-9 credits, S/U grading
in their home country are not covered by
May be repeated 6 times FOR credit.
mandatory health plan and must contact the
Insurance Office for the insurance charge to
WST 698: Practicing Women's and
be removed. International students who are
Gender Studies
not in their home country are charged for the
The teaching practicum is designed for
women's and gender studies certificate students mandatory health insurance. If they are to be
covered by another insurance plan they must
who anticipate teaching classes outside of,
file a waiver by the second week of classes.
or in addition to, their disciplinary home. To
The charge will only be removed if other
help students prepare for this likelihood, we
plan is deemed comparable. All international
will spend several sessions working together
students must have received clearance from an
to construct an introductory course syllabus
International Advisor. Semesters offered: Fall,
in Women's and Gender Studies. At the same
Spring, 1-9 credits, S/U grading
time, we will consider broader questions
May be repeated for credit.
about the university as an institution in the
current moment, and the place of Women's
WST 800: Summer Research
and Gender Studies within the contemporary
May be repeated for credit. Semesters offered:
university. Along with a consideration of the
Summer
changing practices and objects of feminist
knowledge production, we will also discuss the S/U grading
changing politics and economics of academia, May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
and the impact of the wider academic milieu
on what and how knowledge is produced.
WST 850: Summer Teaching
We will ask: what has women's studies
May be repeated for credit Semesters Offered:
been; what kinds of interdisciplinarity or
Summer
transdisciplinarity are possible in women's
S/U grading
and gender studies; and finally, what might
May be repeated 1 times FOR credit.
women's and gender studies become?
Fall or Spring, 3 credits, Letter graded (A, A-,
B+, etc.)
WST 699: Dissertation Research on
Campus
Prerequisite: Advancement to candidacy (G5).
A portion of dissertation research must take
place on SBU campus.
Fall, Spring, 3-9 credits, S/U grading
May be repeated for credit.
WST 700: Dissertation Research off
Campus
Prerequisite: Must be advanced to candidacy
(G5). Major portion of research will take place

Stony Brook University Graduate Bulletin: www.stonybrook.edu/gradbulletin

224

